Uncorrected proof, all content subject to change at publisher discretion. Not for resale, circulation or distribution in whole or in part. ©Pearson 2018

Published by Pearson Education Limited, 80 Strand, London, WC2R 0RL. www.pearsonglobalschools.com
Copies of official specifications for all Pearson Edexcel qualifications may be found on the website: https://qualifications.pearson.com

Text © Ann Fullick and Pearson Education Limited 2018 Edited by Deborah Webb and Penelope Lyons
Indexed by Judith Reading
Designed by © Pearson Education Limited 2018 Typeset by © Tech-Set Ltd, Gateshead, UK
Original illustrations © Pearson Education Limited 2018 Illustrated by © Tech-Set Ltd, Gateshead, UK
Cover design by © Pearson Education Limited 2018 Cover images: Front: Getty Images: Fernan Federici Inside front cover: Shutterstock.com, Dmitry Lobanov

The rights of Ann Fullick and Frank Sochacki to be identified as the authors of this work have been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

First published 2018

21 20 19 18
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library ISBN 978 1 2922 4484 6

Copyright notice
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form or by any means (including photocopying or storing it in any medium by electronic means and whether or not transiently or incidentally to some other use of this publication) without the written permission of the copyright owner, except in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, Barnard’s Inn, 86 Fetter Lane, London EC4A 1EN (www.cla.co.uk). Applications for the copyright owner’s written permission should be addressed to the publisher.

Printed in Slovakia by Neografia

Endorsement statement
In order to ensure that this resource offers high-quality support for the associated Pearson qualification, it has been through a review process by the awarding body. This process confirmed that this resource fully covers the teaching and learning content of the specification at which it is aimed. It also confirms that it demonstrates an appropriate balance between the development of subject skills, knowledge and understanding, in addition to preparation for assessment.

Endorsement does not cover any guidance on assessment activities or processes (e.g. practice questions or advice on how to answer assessment questions) included in the resource, nor does it prescribe any particular approach to the teaching or delivery of a related course.

While the publishers have made every attempt to ensure that advice on the qualification and its assessment is accurate, the official specification and associated assessment guidance materials are the only authoritative source of information and should always be referred to for definitive guidance.

Pearson examiners have not contributed to any sections in this resource relevant to examination papers for which they have responsibility.

Examiners will not use endorsed resources as a source of material for any assessment set by Pearson. Endorsement of a resource does not mean that the resource is required to achieve this Pearson qualification, nor does it mean that it is the only suitable material available to support the qualification, and any resource lists produced by the awarding body shall include this and other appropriate resources.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to the following for permission to reproduce copyright material:

Figures
Figure on page 60 based on data from American Journal of Epidemiology similar to this http://healthhubs.net/heartdisease/waist-size-predicts-heart-disease-risk- better-than-bmi/;Figure on page 68 from pro.activ sponsored studies; Figure on page 63 data from http://annals.org /data/Journals/AIM/19985/10FF1.jpeg to show results of cohort study http://annals.org /aim/article/714567/effect-fruit- vegetable-intake-risk-coronary-heart-disease;Figure on page 65 Dubai health survey 2014,http://gulfnews.com/polopoly_fs /1.1838305.1464708870!/image
/754489788.jpg;Figure on page 73 data from http://annals.org/data/Journals/ AIM/19985 /10FF1.jpeg to show results of cohort study http://annals .org/aim/ article/714567/effect-fruit-vegetable-intake-risk-coronary-heart-disease; Figure on page 97 from Measuring the effect of an asthma attackhttps://www.abpischools. org.uk /topic/breathingandasthma/7.

Text
Extract on page 22 from Luyckx J., Baudouin C. Trehalose: an intriguing disaccharide with potential for medical application in ophthalmology. Clinical ophthalmology (Auckland, NZ) 5 (2011): 577; Extract on page 70 from Mostafa Q Al-Shamiri. Heart failure in the Middle East. Current Cardiology Reviews 2013
May; 9(2):174–178https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles /PMC3682400/#R10; Extract on page 96 from Qingling Zhang, Zhiming Qiu, Kian Fan Chung, Shau-Ku Huang. Journal of Thoracic Disease. 2015 Jan; 7(1): 14–22https://www.ncbi.nlm. nih. gov/pmc/articles /PMC4311080/#r3; Extract on page 97 from Qingling Zhang, Zhiming Qiu, Kian Fan Chung, Shau-Ku Huang. Journal of Thoracic Disease. 2015 Jan; 7(1): 14–22https://www .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles /PMC4311080/#r3; Extract on page 122 Based on a number of different websites promoting ‘good health’; Extract on page 190 from In vitro fertilisation by Ann Fullick. 2nd ed. 2009. Heinemann series ‘Science at the Edge’; Extract on page 218 from ‘Me, myself,
us. The human microbiome – looking at humans as ecosystems that contain many collaborating species could change the practice of medicine’, The Economist, 18 August 2012; Extract on page 262 from Leonard, Jennifer A., Nadin Rohland, Scott Glaberman, Robert C. Fleischer, Adalgisa Caccone and Michael Hofreiter. ‘A rapid loss of stripes: the evolutionary history of the extinct quagga.’ Biology letters 1, no. 3 (2005): 291 –295; Extract on page 262 From Quagga rebreeding: a success story by Keri Harvey, Copyright 2014 by Farmer’s Weekly Magazine. Used by permission of the Farmer’s Weekly Magazine; Extract on page 294 from Alexander Nater, et
al. Morphometric, behavioral, and genomic evidence for a new orangutan species. Current Biology November 2017.http://www.cell.com/ current-biology/fulltext/ S0960-9822(17)31245-9.







COURSE STRUCTURE ABOUT THIS BOOK PRACTICAL SKILLS ASSESSMENT OVERVIEW TOPIC 1
TOPIC 2
TOPIC 3
TOPIC 4 MATHS SKILLS
PREPARING FOR YOUR EXAMS COMMAND WORDS GLOSSARY
INDEX
  
iv vi viii
x 2
74
148
220
294
302
308
309
320







TOPIC 1
MOLECULES, TRANSPORT AND HEALTH
1A CHEMISTRY FOR BIOLOGISTS	2
1 THE CHEMISTRY OF LIFE	4
2 CARBOHYDRATES 1: MONOSACCHARIDES
AND DISACCHARIDES	8
3 CARBOHYDRATES 2: POLYSACCHARIDES	11
4 LIPIDS	14
5 PROTEINS	16
THINKING BIGGER: TREHALOSE	22
EXAM PRACTICE	24
1B MAMMALIAN TRANSPORT
SYSTEMS	26
1 THE PRINCIPLES OF CIRCULATION	28
2 THE ROLES OF THE BLOOD	31
3 CIRCULATION IN THE BLOOD VESSELS	37
4 THE MAMMALIAN HEART	41
5 ATHEROSCLEROSIS	44
EXAM PRACTICE	48
1C CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH AND
RISK	50
1 RISK, CORRELATION AND CAUSE	52
2 INVESTIGATING THE CAUSES OF CVDs	54
3 RISK FACTORS FOR CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE	56
4 DIET AND CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH	59
5 DIETARY ANTIOXIDANTS AND CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE	63
6 USING THE EVIDENCE	65
7 THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF
TREATMENT	67
THINKING BIGGER: HEART FAILURE	70
EXAM PRACTICE	72

TOPIC 2
MEMBRANES, PROTEINS, DNA AND GENE EXPRESSION
2A MEMBRANES AND TRANSPORT	74
1 CELL MEMBRANES	76
2 CELL TRANSPORT AND DIFFUSION	80
3 OSMOSIS: A SPECIAL CASE OF
DIFFUSION	83
4 ACTIVE TRANSPORT	86
5 THE NEED FOR GAS EXCHANGE
SURFACES	88
6 THE MAMMALIAN GAS EXCHANGE
SYSTEM	90
THINKING BIGGER: ASTHMA AND
AIR POLLUTION	96
EXAM PRACTICE	99
2B PROTEINS AND DNA	100
1 ENZYMES	102
2 HOW ENZYMES WORK	104
3 THE STRUCTURE OF DNA AND RNA	108
4 HOW DNA WORKS	111
5 THE GENETIC CODE	114
6 DNA AND PROTEIN SYNTHESIS	117
THINKING BIGGER: RAW ENZYMES	120
EXAM PRACTICE	122
2C GENE EXPRESSION AND GENETICS	124
1 GENE MUTATION	126
2 PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE	129
3 SEX LINKAGE	134
4 CYSTIC FIBROSIS: A GENETIC DISEASE	138
5 GENETIC SCREENING	142
EXAM PRACTICE	146




TOPIC 3
CELL STRUCTURE, REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
3A CELL STRUCTURE	148
1 OBSERVING CELLS	150
2 EUKARYOTIC CELLS 1: COMMON
CELLULAR STRUCTURES	154
3 EUKARYOTIC CELLS 2: PROTEIN
TRANSPORT	158
4 PROKARYOTIC CELLS	160
5 THE ORGANISATION OF CELLS	163
EXAM PRACTICE	166
3B MITOSIS, MEIOSIS AND
REPRODUCTION	168
1 THE CELL CYCLE	170
2 MITOSIS	173
3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION AND MEIOSIS	177
4 GAMETES: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION	182
5 FERTILISATION IN MAMMALS AND
PLANTS	185
THINKING BIGGER: MALE INFERTILITY	188
EXAM PRACTICE	190
3C DEVELOPMENT OF ORGANISMS	192
1 CELL DIFFERENTIATION	194
2 INTERACTIONS BETWEEN GENES AND
THE ENVIRONMENT	198
3 CONTROLLING GENE EXPRESSION	204
4 STEM CELLS	209
5 USING STEM CELLS	212
THINKING BIGGER: MICROBIOTA	216
EXAM PRACTICE	218

TOPIC 4
PLANT STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION, BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
4A PLANT STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION	220
1 THE CELL WALL	222
2 PLANT ORGANELLES	226
3 PLANT STEMS	228
4 WATER AND MINERALS IN PLANTS	232
5 USING PLANT STARCH AND FIBRES	234
6 PLANT-BASED MEDICINES	238
7 DEVELOPING NEW DRUGS	241
EXAM PRACTICE	244
4B CLASSIFICATION	246
1 PRINCIPLES OF CLASSIFICATION	248
2 WHAT IS A SPECIES?	251
3 DOMAINS, KINGDOMS OR BOTH?	255
THINKING BIGGER: THE QUAGGA	260
EXAM PRACTICE	262
4C BIODIVERSITY AND
CONSERVATION	264
1 BIODIVERSITY AND ENDEMISM	266
2 MEASURING BIODIVERSITY	270
3 ADAPTATION TO A NICHE	274
4 GENE POOL AND GENETIC DIVERSITY	277
5 REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION AND
SPECIATION	281
6 CONSERVATION: WHY AND HOW?	285
THINKING BIGGER: ORANG-UTANS	290
EXAM PRACTICE	292
MATHS SKILLS	294
PREPARING FOR YOUR EXAMS	302
COMMAND WORDS	308
GLOSSARY	309
INDEX	320


ABOUT THIS BOOK
This book is written for students following the Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary (IAS) Biology specification. This book covers the full IAS course and the first year of the International A Level (IAL) course.
The book contains full coverage of IAS units (or exam papers) 1 and 2. Each unit in the specification has two topic areas. The topics in this book, and their contents, fully match the specification. You can refer to the Assessment Overview on page x for further information. Students can prepare for the written Practical Paper (unit 3) by using the IAL Biology Lab Book (see page viii of this book).
Each topic is divided into chapters and sections to break the content down into manageable chunks. Each section features a mix of learning and activities.




Learning objectives
Each chapter starts with a list of key assessment objectives.

Specification reference
The exact specification references covered in the section are provided.

Exam hints
Tips on how to answer exam-style questions and guidance for exam preparation. Orange Learning Tips help you focus your learning and avoid common errors.






























Worked examples show you how to work through questions, and set out calculations.

Subject vocabulary
Key terms are highlighted in blue in the text. Clear definitions are provided at the end of each section for easy reference, and are also collated in a glossary at the back of the book.




PRACTICAL SKILLS
Practical work is central to the study of biology. The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary (IAS) Biology specification includes nine Core Practicals that link theoretical knowledge and understanding to practical scenarios.
In order to develop practical skills, you should carry out a range of practical experiments related to the topics covered in your course. Further suggestions in addition to the Core Practicals are included below.

STUDENT BOOK TOPICIAS CORE PRACTICALSTOPIC 1
MOLECULES, TRANSPORT AND HEALTHCP1


CP2 CP3
CP4




CP5



CP6 CP7





CP8 CP9Use a semi-quantitative method with Benedict’s reagent to estimate the concentrations of reducing sugars and with iodine solution to estimate the concentrations of starch, using colour standards.
Investigate the vitamin C content of food and drink.

Investigate membrane properties including the effect of alcohol and temperature on membrane permeability.
Investigate the effect of temperature, pH, enzyme concentration and substrate concentration on the initial rate of enzyme-catalysed reactions.


Use a light microscope to:
(i) make observations and labelled drawings of suitable animal cells
(ii) use a graticule with a microscope to make measurements and understand the concept of scale.
Prepare and stain a root tip squash to observe the stages of mitosis. Use a light microscope to:
(i) make observations, draw and label plan diagrams of transverse sections of roots, stems and leaves
(ii) make observations, draw and label cells of plant tissues
(iii) identify sclerenchyma fibres, phloem, sieve tubes and xylem vessels and their location.
Determine the tensile strength of plant fibres.
Investigate the antimicrobial properties of plants, including aseptic techniques for the safe handling of bacteria.
TOPIC 2
MEMBRANES, PROTEINS, DNA AND GENE EXPRESSION

TOPIC 3
CELL STRUCTURE, REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TOPIC 4
PLANT STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION, BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION




Your knowledge and understanding of practical skills and activities will be assessed in all examination papers for the IAS Level Biology qualification.
• Papers 1 and 2 will include questions based on practical activities, including novel scenarios.
• Paper 3 will test your ability to plan practical work, including risk management and selection of apparatus.




ASSESSMENT OVERVIEW
The following tables give an overview of the assessment for Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary course in Biology. You should study this information closely to help ensure that you are fully prepared for this course and
know exactly what to expect in each part of the examination. More information about this qualification, and about the question types in the different papers, can be found on page 302 of this book.

PAPER / UNIT 1PERCENTAGE OF IASPERCENTAGE OF IALMARKTIMEAVAILABILITYMOLECULES, DIET, TRANSPORT AND HEALTH40%20%801 hour
30 minutesJanuary, June and October First assessment : January 2019Written examinationPaper codeWBI11/01Externally set and marked byPearson EdexcelSingle tier of entryPAPER / UNIT 2PERCENTAGE OF IASPERCENTAGE OF IALMARKTIMEAVAILABILITYCELLS, DEVELOPMENT, BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION40%20%801 hour
30 minutesJanuary, June and October First assessment : June 2019Written examinationPaper codeWBI12/01Externally set and marked byPearson EdexcelSingle tier of entryPAPER / UNIT 3PERCENTAGE OF IASPERCENTAGE OF IALMARKTIMEAVAILABILITYPRACTICAL SKILLS IN BIOLOGY 1
Written examination20%10%501 hour
20 minutesJanuary, June and October First assessment : June 2019Paper codeWBI13/01Externally set and marked byPearson EdexcelSingle tier of entry

ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVES AND WEIGHTINGS

ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVEDESCRIPTION% IN IAS% IN IA2% IN IALA01Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of science36–3931–3434–37(a) Application of knowledge and understanding of science in familiar and unfamiliar contexts.
(b) Analysis and evaluation of scientific information to make judgments and reach conclusions.34–3633–3633–36A02
9–11
14–16
11–14A03Experimental skills in science, including analysis and evaluation of data and methods17–1817–1817–18RELATIONSHIP OF ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVES TO UNITS


UNIT NUMBERASSESSMENT OBJECTIVEA01A02 (a)A02 (b)A03UNIT 117–1817–184.5–5.50UNIT 217–1817–184.5–5.50UNIT 32–30017–18TOTAL FOR INTERNATIONAL ADVANCED SUBSIDIARY36–3934–36	9–1117–18
TOPIC 1 MOLECULES,
TRANSPORT AND HEALTH
CHEMISTRY FOR BIOLOGISTS
Water is essential to life. Everyone knows this. Yet the jerboa, a small rodent found throughout Asia and Northern Africa, may never drink water in its life. The jerboa (family Dipodidae) is found in both hot and cold deserts from the Sahara Desert to the Gobi Desert. It is extremely well adapted for dry desert environments and gets the water it needs from the food it eats. This includes plant leaves, roots and seeds, and in some cases insects. Jerboas also produce tiny amounts of very concentrated urine to get rid of their waste products, another adaptation for saving the water needed for life.
Biology is the study of living things. The basic unit of life is the cell, but underpinning all life is chemistry. The way atoms are bonded together affects the way chemicals work in the cells – and that affects everything, from the way plants make food by photosynthesis to the way your eyes respond to light.
In this chapter, you will be looking at some of the important ways in which atoms and molecules interact to make up the chemistry of life. You will be using these basic principles throughout your biology course because they are fundamental to the structures and functions of all the organisms you will study.
You will see how the chemistry of water enables life to survive and chemical reactions to continue. You will look at carbohydrates, from the simplest sugars to the most complex polysaccharides. These molecules have a wide variety of uses in organisms, from the fuel for cellular respiration to the main structural material in plants. As you discover how the molecules are joined together, you will recognise the relationships between the structure of the molecules and their functions in the body.
The same links between structure and function are clear when you look at the structure of lipid molecules. For example, lipids are used as energy stores in both animals and plants. Lipids are non-polar molecules but you will discover how they can become polar in combination with other inorganic groups such as phosphates. This polarity has great importance for the characteristics of the cell membrane.
At the end of this chapter, you will study the structure of proteins. They are long chains of amino acids that are held together by chemical bonds to make complex structures. The bonds include the covalent bonds, ionic bonds and hydrogen bonds.
MATHS SKILLS FOR THIS CHAPTER
• Recognise and make appropriate use of units in calculations (e.g. millimetres)
• Use ratios, fractions and percentages (e.g. representing the relationships between atoms in an ion or molecule)



What prior knowledge do I need?
• Life processes depend on molecules whose structure is related to their function
• All living things are made up of cells
• Many processes in living cells, including diffusion and osmosis, depend on water
• Reactions in cells take place in solution in water
• Complex carbohydrates are made up of sugars joined together
• Complex carbohydrates can be broken down to give simple sugars that can be used by cells
• Plants make carbohydrates in photosynthesis
• Lipids are made up of fatty acids and glycerol
• Lipids are molecules used to store energy in the bodies of animals and plants
• Proteins are long chains of amino acids
• Enzymes are made of proteins

What will I study in this chapter?
• How ionic and covalent bonding affect the nature of the compound formed
• The formation of anions and cations in ionic bonding
• The formation of dipoles in some covalent molecules leading to intra- and intermolecular bonds (e.g. hydrogen bonds)
• The chemistry of water and how this affects its properties
• The importance of water to living things
• The structure of different types of monosaccharide
• The formation of disaccharides by the joining of two monosaccharides in a condensation reaction
• The structure of complex polysaccharides and how their structure is related to their functions as storage molecules
• The structure of lipids including the formation of ester bonds
• The primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure of proteins and how the structure is related to the function of the protein
• The structure of amino acids, peptides and polypeptides and how they relate to each other
• The formation of peptide bonds between amino acids





What will I study later?
Chapter 2A
• The importance of polarity in the structure and function of phospholipids
• How the structure of phospholipids determines many of the characteristics of the cell membrane
• How proteins act as carrier systems in cell membranes
• How water is taken into and moved around plants
• The movement of water into and out of cells, tissues and vessels in animals, plants and fungi
Chapter 2B
• The importance of hydrogen bonding in the tertiary and quaternary structure of proteins and in the structure and function of enzymes
Chapter 4A
• The structure of cellulose in plant cell walls Chapter 5A (Book 2: IAL)
• The role of water in the reactions of photosynthesis Chapter 7A (Book 2: IAL)
• The importance of carbohydrates in cellular respiration
• The role of water in the reactions of cellular respiration Chapter 8B (Book 2: IAL)
• The importance of water in plant movements











IONIC AND COVALENT BONDING
Biology is the study of living things – but living things consist of chemical substances. The dragonfly and the plant it is resting on in fig A are all made of chemicals. So is the cow in fig C – and it needs the chemical known as salt which it is licking to stay alive. If you understand some of the basic principles
of chemistry, you will develop a much better understanding of biological systems. The chemical bonds within and between molecules affect the properties of the compounds they form. This affects their functions within the cell and the organism. For example, if you want to understand the chemistry of water, you need to understand chemical bonds and how dipoles are created within molecules.

? fig A All life depends on some very fundamental chemistry.
The basic unit of all elements is the atom. When the atoms of two or more different elements react, they form a compound. An atom is made up of a nucleus containing positive protons and neutral neutrons. The nucleus is surrounded by negative electrons. We can show this in a model as electrons orbiting around the nucleus in shells. When an atom has a full outer shell of electrons, it is stable and does not react. However, most atoms do not have a full outer shell of electrons. In chemical reactions, these electrons are involved in changes that give the atom a stable outer shell. There are two ways they can achieve this.
• Ionic bonding: the atoms involved in the reaction give or receive electrons. One atom, or part of the molecule, gains one or more electrons and becomes an anion (a negative ion). The other atom, or part of the molecule, loses one or more electrons and becomes a cation (a positive ion). Strong forces of attraction called ionic bonds hold the oppositely charged ions together (see fig B).

2
1




Key
 or  represents a single electron
Na
(2,8,1)
sodium atom




1
(2,8,7)
chlorine atom



Na (2,8)
sodium ion






2



(2,8,8)
chloride ion

? fig B The formation of sodium chloride (salt), an inorganic substance that is very important in living organisms, is an example of ionic bonding.



• Covalent bonding: the atoms involved in the reaction share electrons (see fig D). Covalent bonds are very strong and the molecules formed are usually neutral. However, in some covalent compounds, the molecules are slightly polarised: this means that the electrons in the covalent bonds are not quite evenly shared. Consequently, the molecule has a part that is slightly negative and a part that is slightly positive. This separation of charge is called a dipole, and the tiny charges are represented as ? + and ? – (see fig F). The molecule is described as a polar molecule. This polarity is particularly common if the bond involves one or more hydrogen atoms.



H	1
(1)
hydrogen atom

H (1)
hydrogen
atom

H  H (2)
hydrogen
molecule








? fig C Animals such as cows can use a mineral lick to get the salt they need to function.




H	1	H	1		H	H

(1)
hydrogen atom

(1)
hydrogen atom

(2,6)
oxygen atom

(2,8)
water molecule

? fig D The formation of hydrogen molecules and water molecules are examples of covalent bonding.

THE IMPORTANCE OF INORGANIC IONS
When ionic substances dissolve in water, the ions separate in a process called dissociation. Cells are 60–70% water, so in living organisms most ionic substances exist as positive and negative
ions. Many of these ions play specialised roles in individual cells and in the functioning of entire organisms. Here are some of the inorganic ions (and their roles) you will meet as you study biology.
IMPORTANT ANIONS
• Nitrate ions (NO ?) – these are needed in plants to make DNA and also amino acids and, therefore, proteins from the products of photosynthesis (see Sections 1A.5, 2B.3 and Book 2 Chapter 5A).
• Phosphate ions (PO 3?) – these are needed in all living organisms to make ATP and ADP as well as DNA and RNA (see Section 2B.3 and Book 2 Chapter 5A).
• Chloride ions (Cl?) – these are needed in nerve impulses, sweating and many secretory systems in animals (see Book 2 Chapters 7C and 8A).
• Hydrogencarbonate ions (HCO ?) – these are needed to buffer blood pH to prevent it becoming
too acidic (see Section 1B.2).
IMPORTANT CATIONS
• Sodium ions (Na+) – these are needed in nerve impulses, sweating and many secretory systems in animals (see Book 2 Chapter 8A).
• Calcium ions (Ca2+) – these are needed for the formation of calcium pectate for the middle lamella between two cell walls in plants, and for bone formation and muscle contraction in animals (see Section 4A.1 and Book 2 Chapters 7B and 7C).
• Hydrogen ions (H+) – these are needed in cellular respiration and photosynthesis, and in numerous pumps and systems as well as pH balance (see Section 2A.4 and Book 2 Chapters 5A and 7A).
• Magnesium ions (Mg2+) – these are needed for production of chlorophyll in plants (see Book 2 Chapter 5A).




THE CHEMISTRY OF WATER
All reactions in living cells take place in water. Without water, substances could not move around the body. Water is one of the reactants in the process of photosynthesis, on which almost all life depends (see fig E). Understanding the properties of water will help you understand many key systems in living organisms.
Water is also a major habitat – it supports more life than any other part of the planet.
























O?2





H?1


H?1

















H?1











H?1





O?2






H?1





O?2


H?1

















H?1













H?1
























O?2
















H?1













H?1









? fig E Water is vital for life on Earth in many different ways – in a desert, the smallest amount of water allows plants to grow.

The simple chemical formula of water is H2O. This tells us that two atoms of hydrogen are joined to one atom of oxygen to make up each water molecule. However, because the electrons are held closer to the oxygen atom than to the hydrogen atoms, water is a polar molecule (see fig F).
O?2

? fig G Hydrogen bonding in water molecules, based on attraction between positive and negative dipoles.

THE IMPORTANCE OF WATER
The properties of water make it very important in biological systems for many reasons.
• Water is a polar solvent. Because it is a polar molecule, many ionic substances like sodium chloride will dissolve in it (see fig H). Many covalently bonded substances are also polar and will dissolve in water, but often do not dissolve in other covalently bonded solvents such as ethanol. Water also carries other substances, such as starch. As a result, most of the chemical reactions within cells occur in water (in aqueous solution).


sodium and chloride ions in solution in water






104.5°
? fig F A model of a water molecule showing dipoles.

One major effect of this polarity is that water molecules form hydrogen bonds. The slightly negative oxygen atom of one water molecule will attract the slightly positive hydrogen atoms of other water molecules in a weak electrostatic attraction called a hydrogen bond. Each individual hydrogen bond is weak but there are many
of them so the molecules of water ‘stick together’ more than you might expect (see fig G). Water has relatively high melting and boiling points compared with other substances that have molecules of a similar size because it takes a lot of energy to break all the hydrogen bonds that hold the molecules together. Hydrogen bonds are important in protein structure (see Sections 1A.5 and 2B.1) and in the structure and functioning of DNA (see Section 2B.3).




salt and water mixed


sodium chloride NaCl

?1 charges on hydrogen in water are attracted to negative chloride ion



?2 charges on oxygen in water are attracted to the positive sodium ion

? fig H A model of sodium chloride dissolving in water as a result of the interactions between the charges on sodium and chloride ions and the dipoles of the water molecules.



• Water is an excellent transport medium because the dipole nature of water enables many different substances to dissolve in it (see Sections 1B.2, 4A.4 and 4A.5).
• As water cools to 4 °C, it reaches its maximum density. As it cools further, the molecules become more widely spaced. As a result, ice is less dense than water and floats, forming an insulating layer and helping to prevent the water underneath it from freezing. It also melts quickly because, being at the top, it is exposed to the sun. It is very unusual for the solid form of a substance to be less dense than the liquid form. This unusual property enables organisms to live in water, even in countries where it gets cold enough to freeze in winter.
• Water is slow to absorb and release heat – it has a high specific heat capacity. The hydrogen bonds between the molecules need a lot of energy to separate them. This means the temperature of large bodies of water such as lakes and seas does not change much throughout the year. This makes them good habitats for living organisms.
• Water is a liquid – it cannot be compressed. This is an important factor in many hydraulic mechanisms in living organisms.
• Water molecules are cohesive – the forces between the molecules mean they stick together. This is very important for the movement of water from the roots to the leaves of plants (see Sections 4A.3 and 4A.4).
• Water molecules are adhesive – they are attracted to other different molecules. This is also important in plant transport systems and in surface tension.
• Water has a very high surface tension because the attraction between the water molecules, including hydrogen bonds, is greater than the attraction between the water molecules and the air. As a result, the water molecules hold together forming a thin ‘skin’ of surface tension. Surface tension is very important in plant transport systems, and also affects life at the surface of ponds, lakes and other water masses (see fig I).


? fig I Without surface tension, a raft spider like this could not move across the water and hunt.













WHAT ARE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS?
Biological molecules are the key to the structure and function of living things. Biological molecules are often organic compounds. Organic compounds all contain carbon atoms. They also contain atoms of hydrogen, oxygen and, less frequently, nitrogen, sulfur and phosphorus. Most of the material in your body that is not water consists of these organic molecules. An understanding of why organic molecules are special will help you to understand the chemistry of biological molecules including carbohydrates, lipids and proteins.
Each carbon atom can make four bonds and so it can connect to four other atoms. Carbon atoms bond particularly strongly to other carbon atoms to make long chains. The four bonds of a carbon atom usually form a tetrahedral shape. This means
carbon compounds can be rings, branched chains or any number of three-dimensional (3D) shapes (see fig A). In some carbon compounds small molecules (monomers) bond with many other similar units to make a very large molecule called a polymer.
The ability of carbon to combine and make macromolecules (large molecules) is the basis of all biological molecules and provides the great variety and complexity found in living things.
These two bonds are in the plane

CARBOHYDRATES
Carbohydrates are important in cells as a usable energy source and important in human foods around the world (see fig B). They are also important for storing energy and they form an important part of the cell wall in plants, fungi and bacteria. Sugars and starch are the best known carbohydrates. Sucrose is the familiar white crystalline table sugar; glucose is used as a fuel by the cells of our bodies. Starch is in rice, flour and potatoes. But the group of substances called carbohydrates contains many more compounds, as you will discover.









This part of a chain molecule:

of the paper.



This bond sticks out of the plane of the paper.

H	H H	H
   
C	C
C	C	C

H	H H	H H	H

This bond goes back behind the plane of the paper.




can be shown with corners representing carbons, and its hydrogens ignored:



? fig B Carbohydrates are important molecules in both plants and animals – and carbohydrate foods like this bread play a major role in the human diet.
The basic structure of all carbohydrates is the same. They consist of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. There are three main groups
of carbohydrates: monosaccharides, disaccharides and polysaccharides. Some have more complex molecules than others (see Section 1A.3).
MONOSACCHARIDES: THE SIMPLE SUGARS
Monosaccharides are simple sugars in which there is one oxygen

or more often as:	H	H	H	H	H

atom and two hydrogen atoms for each carbon atom in the molecule. A general formula for this can be written (CH2O)n. Here

C	C	C	C	C
				
H	H	H	H	H
? fig A The bonds in a carbon atom have a complicated 3D shape. This is difficult to represent, so in most molecular diagrams we use one of several different ways to draw them.

n can be any number, but it is usually low.
Triose sugars (n = 3) have three carbon atoms and the general formula C3H6O3. They are important in mitochondria, where the respiration process breaks down glucose into triose sugars (see Book 2 Chapter 7A).




• Pentose sugars (n = 5) have five carbon atoms and the general formula C5H10O5. Ribose and deoxyribose are important in the nucleic acids deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA), which make up the genetic material (see Section 2B.3).
• Hexose sugars (n = 6) have six carbon atoms and the general formula C6H12O6. They are the best known monosaccharides, often taste sweet and include glucose, galactose and fructose.
General formulae show you how many atoms there are in the molecule, and what type they are, but they do not tell you what the molecule looks like and why it behaves as it does. To show this, you can use displayed formulae. Although these do not show all the detailed shape in the carbon chain, they can give you a good idea of how the molecules are arranged in three dimensions. This can help to explain why biological systems behave as they do (see figs C and D).
ribose
CH2OH	OH O

C
H	H



OH	OH

and this affects the polymers that are made. You will learn more about ?- and ?-glucose in Section 4A.5.


DISACCHARIDES: THE DOUBLE SUGARS
Disaccharides consist of two monosaccharides joined together – for example sucrose (table sugar) is formed by a molecule
of ?-glucose joining with a molecule of fructose. Two monosaccharides join in a condensation reaction to form a disaccharide, and a molecule of water (H2O) is released. The link between the two monosaccharides results in a covalent
bond known as a glycosidic bond (see fig E). We use numbers to show which carbon atoms are involved in the bond. If
carbon 1 on one monosaccharide joins to carbon 4 on another monosaccharide, we call it a 1,4-glycosidic bond. If the bond is between carbon 1 and carbon 6, it is a 1,6-glycosidic bond.

? fig C Pentose sugars such as ribose have 5 carbon atoms.

?-glucose	?-glucose

?-glucose	?-glucose

6
H	5	O

6
H	H	5	O	H

CH2OH

CH2OH


4	1	4	1

H

H

HO	OH

HO	OH




HO
H	OH




HO
H	OH

or, even more simply:

3

H2O
6
H	5
4
HO	3

2	3	2
condensation

6
O	H H	5	O	H
1	4	1
O	OH
2	3	2

?-glucose	?-glucose

maltose

1,4-glycosidic bond


H



HO


H



HO

? fig E The formation of a glycosidic bond. The condensation reaction between two monosaccharides results in a disaccharide and a molecule of water.
When different monosaccharides join together, different disaccharides are made, and these have different properties. Many disaccharides taste sweet. Table A shows some of the more

In these diagrams, the positions of carbon atoms are represented by their numbers only.
Note carefully the different arrangement of atoms around the carbon 1 atom in ?-glucose and ?-glucose.
? fig D Hexose sugars have a ring structure. The arrangement of the atoms on the side chains can make a significant difference to the way in which the molecule can be used by the body. The carbon atoms are numbered in order to identify the different arrangements.
Glucose has two isomers (different forms): ?-glucose and
?-glucose. The two isomers have different arrangements of the atoms on the side chains of the molecule. The different isomers form different bonds between neighbouring glucose molecules,

common ones.

DISACCHARIDESOURCEMONOSACCHARIDEsucrosestored in plants such as sugar caneglucose + fructoselactosemilk sugar – this is the main carbohydrate found in milkglucose + galactosemaltosemalt sugar – found in germinating seed such as barleyglucose + glucosetable A Three common disaccharides



PRACTICAL SKILLSCP1Testing for sugars
Benedict’s solution is a chemical reagent for testing reducing sugars. It is a bright blue solution that contains copper(II) ions. Some sugars react readily with this solution when heated gently and reduce the copper(II) ions to copper(I) ions; a precipitate is formed and a
colour change from blue to orange occurs (see fig F). Sugars that react in this way are known as reducing sugars. All of the monosaccharides and some disaccharides (but not sucrose) are reducing sugars.
Some sugars do not react with Benedict’s solution. They are known	? fig F Benedict’s test for reducing
as non-reducing sugars. You can heat a non-reducing sugar such as	sugars
sucrose with a few drops of hydrochloric acid, allow it to cool and then neutralise the solution with sodium hydrogen carbonate to hydrolyse the glycosidic bonds. This produces the monosaccharide units of the sugar, which will give a positive Benedict’s test.



PROBLEM SOLVING


SUBJECT VOCABULARY
monomer a small molecule that is a single unit of a larger molecule called a polymer
polymer a long-chain molecule made up of many smaller, repeating monomer units joined together by chemical bonds
macromolecule a very large molecule often formed by polymerisation
starch a long-chain polymer formed of glucose monomers
sucrose a sweet-tasting disaccharide formed by the joining of glucose and fructose by a 1,4-glycosidic bond
glucose a hexose sugar
monosaccharide a single sugar monomer
disaccharide a sugar made up of two monosaccharide units joined by a glycosidic bond, formed in a condensation reaction
polysaccharide a polymer consisting of long chains of monosaccharide units joined by glycosidic bonds
triose sugar a sugar with three carbon atoms
pentose sugar a sugar with five carbon atoms
ribose a pentose sugar that is part of the structure of RNA
deoxyribose a pentose sugar that is part of the structure of DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) a nucleic acid that is the genetic material in many organisms
ribonucleic acid (RNA) a nucleic acid which is the genetic material in some organisms and is involved in protein synthesis
hexose sugar sugar with six carbon atoms
isomers molecules that have the same chemical formula, but different molecular structures
condensation reaction a reaction in which a molecule of water is removed from the reacting molecules as a bond is formed between them
glycosidic bond a covalent bond formed between two monosaccharides in a condensation reaction, which can be broken down by a hydrolysis reaction to release the monosaccharide units
reducing sugars sugars that react with blue Benedict’s solution and reduce the copper(II) ions to copper(I) ions giving an orangey-red precipitate
non-reducing sugars sugars that do not react with Benedict’s solution




1.2(i)1.2(ii)1.3


The most complex carbohydrates are the polysaccharides. They are made of many monosaccharide units joined by condensation reactions that create glycosidic bonds (see Section 1A.2 fig E). Polysaccharides do not have the sweet taste of many mono- and disaccharides, but these complex polymers include some very important biological molecules.
Molecules with between 3 and 10 sugar units are known as oligosaccharides, while molecules containing 11 or more monosaccharides are known as true polysaccharides. The glycosidic bonds in the polysaccharide can be broken to release monosaccharide units for cellular respiration.
The glycosidic bond between two glucose units is split by a process known as hydrolysis (see fig A). The hydrolysis reaction is the opposite of the condensation reaction that created the molecule, so water is added to the bond. Starch and glycogen are gradually broken down into shorter and shorter chains and eventually single sugars are left. Disaccharides break down to form two monosaccharides. Hydrolysis takes place during digestion in the gut, and also in the muscle and liver cells when the carbohydrate stores are broken down to release sugars for use in cellular respiration (see Book 2 Chapter 7A).
?-glucose	?-glucose

6
H	5	O


H	H	H



4	1

HO	OH
3	2



HO	OH





H2O

condensation	hydrolysis





H2O

H




H
3

OH
2


? fig A Glycosidic bonds are made by condensation reactions and broken down by hydrolysis.

CARBOHYDRATES AND ENERGY
MONOSACCHARIDES AND DISACCHARIDES
Every chemical reaction taking place in a cell needs energy. This energy is supplied by a substance called adenosine triphosphate, ATP. This ATP comes from the breakdown of the monosaccharide glucose, using oxygen, in the process of cellular respiration. You will learn much more about cellular respiration later in your course in Book 2 Chapter 7A.
The arrangement of atoms in a molecule of ?-glucose means that it can be broken down completely in a series of reactions, if oxygen is available. The compounds that are produced, called the end products, are waste carbon dioxide and water, and lots of ATP. This supplies the energy needed for all the reactions in the cell.


Any glucose in the food you eat can be absorbed and used directly in your cells. Other monosaccharides and disaccharides – for example, fructose, maltose and sucrose – are also easily absorbed in the body and rapidly converted to glucose. So foods
containing monosaccharides and disaccharides are a good source of relatively instant energy (see fig B). However, these cannot be used to store energy because they are chemically active, and they are very soluble in water, so they affect the water balance of the cells. You will find out why that is so important in Chapter 2A.



? fig B These medjool dates contain a lot of fructose. That is why they taste so sweet and give you instant energy.
POLYSACCHARIDES
The structure of polysaccharides makes them ideal as energy storage molecules within a cell.
• They can form very compact molecules, which take up little space.
• They are physically and chemically inactive, so they do not interfere with the other functions of the cell.
• They are not very soluble in water, so have almost no effect on water potential within a cell and cause no osmotic water movements.






Starch has a combination of straight-chain amylose and branched- chain amylopectin molecules (see fig D). This combination explains why carbohydrate foods like rice and pasta are so good for you when you are doing sport or hard physical work. The amylopectin releases glucose for cellular respiration rapidly
when needed. Amylose releases glucose more slowly over time, keeping you going longer.

STARCH
Starch is particularly important as an energy store in plants. The sugars produced by photosynthesis are rapidly converted into starch, which is insoluble and compact but can be broken down rapidly to release glucose when it is needed. Storage organs such as sweet potatoes (yams) are particularly rich in starch. You will find out a lot more about the importance of starch in plants in Chapter 4A of this book.
Starch consists of long chains of ?-glucose. But if you look at it more closely you will see that it is a mixture of two compounds:
• Amylose: an unbranched polymer of between 200 and 5000 glucose units. As the chain lengthens the molecule spirals, which makes it more compact for storage.
• Amylopectin: a branched polymer of glucose units. The branching chains have many terminal glucose units that can be broken off rapidly when energy is needed.
Amylose and amylopectin are both long chains of ?-glucose units – so why are the molecules so different? It all depends on the carbon atoms involved in the glycosidic bonds.
Amylose has only 1,4-glycosidic bonds, which is why the molecules are long unbranched chains.

side group


amylose





this chain forms a spiral


amylopectin


1,6-glycosidic bond






1,4-glycosidic bond

In amylopectin, many of the glucose molecules are joined by
1,4-glycosidic bonds, but there are also a few 1,6-glycosidic bonds. This results in the branching chains that change the properties of the molecule.


? fig D Amylose and amylopectin — a small difference in the position of the glycosidic bonds in the molecule makes a big difference to the properties of the compounds.



GLYCOGEN
Glycogen is sometimes referred to as ‘animal starch’ because it is the only carbohydrate energy store found in animals. It is also an important storage carbohydrate in fungi. Chemically, glycogen is very similar to the amylopectin molecules in starch, and it also has many ?-glucose units. Like starch, it is very compact, but the glycogen molecule has more 1,6-glycosidic bonds than the starch molecule, giving it many side branches. This means that glycogen can be broken down very rapidly. This makes it an ideal source of glucose for animals which may require rapid release of energy at certain times of high activity levels (see fig E).
(a)
nucleus


glycogen granules

(b)




CH2OH




CH2OH


1



H

CH2OH





H	OH

OH

CH2OH





H	OH



6 CH2
H 5 H
OH
O
3
H





O	H
H 1
O
2
OH



CH2OH





H	OH



CH2OH
H	O	H
H
OH	H
O	OH
H	OH

? fig E In (a) you can see liver cells full of small glycogen granules, stained pink in this micrograph. If your blood glucose levels are low, this glycogen store in your liver can be broken down to provide the glucose you need for cellular respiration. In (b) you can see the structure of glycogen with 1,4 and 1,6-glycosidic bonds.
The chemical structure of glycogen shown in fig E (b) looks very similar to that of amylopectin. However, when you look at bigger sections of the molecules in fig F you can see that glycogen has many more branches than amylopectin.

amylose


amylopectin	glycogen
? fig F You can clearly see the many side branches which allow glycogen to be broken down so quickly when you compare amylose, amylopectin and glycogen.
















? fig A Olive oil comes from pressed olives and is widely used for food and cooking around the world.

The lipids are another group of organic substances that play a vital role in organisms. They are an integral part of all cell membranes and are also used as an energy store. Lipids contain many carbon– hydrogen bonds and almost no oxygen. When lipids are oxidised in the respiration process, the bonds are broken and carbon dioxide and water are the final products. This reaction can be used to drive the production of much ATP (see Sections 1A.3, 2A.2 and 2A.4 and Book 2 Chapter 5A). Lipids, especially triglycerides, store about three times as much energy as the same mass of carbohydrates. Many plants and animals convert spare food into oils or fats as an energy store to use when needed. For example, the seeds of plants contain lipids to provide energy for the seedling when it starts to grow, which is why seeds are such an important food source for many animals.

FATS AND OILS
Fats and oils are important groups of lipids. Chemically they are very similar, but fats such as butter are solids at room temperature whereas oils such as olive oil are liquids (see fig A). Fats come mainly from animal sources while oils are mainly from plant sources.
Like carbohydrates, the chemical elements that all lipid molecules contain are carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. However, lipids contain a much lower proportion of oxygen than carbohydrates. Fats and oils contain two types of organic chemical substance, fatty acids and glycerol (propane-1,2,3-triol).
These are combined using ester bonds. Glycerol has the chemical formula C3H8O3 (see fig B).
All fatty acids have a long hydrocarbon chain – a folded backbone of carbon atoms with hydrogen atoms attached, and a carboxyl group (–COOH) at one end. Living tissues contain more than 70 different types of fatty acid. Fatty acids vary in two ways:
• the length of the carbon chain can differ (but is often 15–17 carbon atoms long)

H	H	H


H	C	C	C


OH	OH	OH
• 
the fatty acid may be a saturated fatty acid or an unsaturated fatty acid.
In a saturated fatty acid, each carbon atom is joined to the one next to it by a single covalent bond. A common example is stearic acid (see fig C). In an unsaturated fatty acid, the carbon chains have
H one or more double covalent bonds between carbon atoms in them. A monounsaturated fatty acid has one carbon–carbon double bond and a polyunsaturated fatty acid has more than one carbon–carbon double bond (see fig D). Linoleic acid is an example of a polyunsaturated fatty acid. It is an essential fatty acid in our diet because we cannot make it from other substances.

? fig B Displayed formula of glycerol (propane-1,2,3-triol)


H	H
	
H	C	C


H	 H	 H	 H	 H	 H C	C	C	C	C	C


H	H	H
		
C	C	C


H	 H	 H	 H	 H C	C	C	C	C


H	O
	
C	C	OH

H	H	H	H	H

H	H	H

H	H	H	H	H

H	H	H	H


  

CH3

(CH2)16

COOH

? fig C Displayed formula of stearic acid, a saturated fatty acid found in both plant and animal fats


H	H	H	H	H	H	H	H

H	H	H	H	H

H	H	H	H	O

																	

H	C	C

C	C	C	C  C	C

C	C	C

C	C	C	C	C

C	C	OH

												

H	H	H	H	H	H

H	H	H

H	H	H	H

carbon–carbon double bond
? fig D Displayed formula of linoleic acid, a polyunsaturated fatty acid



FORMING ESTER BONDS
A triglyceride is made when glycerol combines with three fatty acids. A bond is formed in a condensation reaction between the carboxyl group (–COOH) of a fatty acid and one of the hydroxyl groups (–OH) of the glycerol. A molecule of water is removed and the bond created is called an ester bond. This type of condensation reaction is called esterification (see fig E). The nature of the lipid formed depends on which fatty acids are joined together. For example, lipids containing saturated fatty acids are more likely to be solid at room temperature than those containing unsaturated fatty acids. Longer chain fatty acids are also more likely to produce solid fats.

For simplicity, fatty acids are represented by this general formula where ‘R’ represents the hydrocarbon chain.
The fatty acids below are drawn in reversed form.

O

R	C	OH


glycerol	3 fatty acids	triglyceride

H	O

H	O  ester bond

		

H	C	OH

HO	C	R O



hydrolysis

H	C	O	C	R
O

H	C	OH

HO	C	R O



condensation

H	C	O	C	R
O

H	C	OH

H

HO	C	R

H	C	O	C	R

H



? fig E The formation of ester bonds

Note: there are only 6 atoms of oxygen in a triglyceride molecule.






ADAPTIVE LEARNING
















About 18% of your body is made up of protein. Proteins make hair, skin and nails, the enzymes needed for metabolism and digestion, and many of the hormones that control the different body systems. They enable muscle fibres to contract, make antibodies that protect you from disease, help clot your blood and transport oxygen in the form of haemoglobin. Understanding the structure of proteins helps you understand the detailed biology of cells and organisms. Like carbohydrates and lipids, proteins contain carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. In addition, they all contain nitrogen and many proteins also contain sulfur.
Proteins are a group of macromolecules made up of many

FORMING PROTEINS FROM AMINO ACIDS
Amino acids join by a reaction between the amino group of one amino acid, and the carboxyl group of another. They join in a condensation reaction and a molecule of water is released. A peptide bond is formed when two amino acids join, and a dipeptide is the result (see fig B). The R group is
not involved in this reaction. More and more amino acids join to form polypeptide chains, which contain from about 100 to many thousands of amino acids. A polypeptide forms a protein when the structure of the chain changes by folding or coiling or associates with other polypeptide chains.

small monomer units called amino acids joined together by

amino acid 1

amino acid 2 (inverted)

condensation reactions. Amino acids combine in long chains to produce proteins. There are about 20 different naturally occurring

R1	H	O

amino acids that can combine in different ways to produce a wide range of different proteins.

AMINO ACIDS
All amino acids have the same basic structure, which is represented as a general formula. There is always an amino group (–NH2) and a carboxyl group (–COOH) attached to a carbon atom (see fig A). The group known as the R group varies between amino acids. Some amino acids contain sulfur and selenium in their R group. The R groups are not involved in the reactions which join the amino acids together, but the structure of the R

H











C	C	OH R2





2O


H	O

group does affect the way the amino acid interacts with others within the protein molecule. This will mainly depend on whether the R group is polar or not, and these interactions affect the tertiary structure of the protein formed (see page 18).
general formula

H	N








dipeptide

C	C	OH R2

R	This part is common to all amino acids and is just shown as a
shaded rectangle in the examples below.
glycine	cysteine
H	CH  SH

? fig A Some different amino acids. In the simplest amino acid, glycine, R is a single hydrogen atom. In a larger amino acid such as cysteine, R is much more complex.

? fig B Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins, joined together by peptide bonds.

BONDS IN PROTEINS
The peptide bond between amino acids is a strong bond. Other bonds are also made between the amino acids in a chain, to create the 3D structures of the protein. They depend on the atoms in the R group and include hydrogen bonds, disulfide bonds and ionic bonds.



HYDROGEN BONDS
You were introduced to hydrogen bonds in Section 1A.1. These same bonds are essential in protein structures. In amino acids, tiny negative charges are present on the oxygen of the carboxyl groups and tiny positive charges are present on the hydrogen atoms of the amino groups. When these charged groups are close to each other, the opposite charges attract, forming a hydrogen bond.
Hydrogen bonds are weak but, potentially, they can be made between any two amino acids in the correct position, so there are many of them holding the protein together very firmly. They are very important in the folding and coiling of polypeptide chains (see fig C). Hydrogen bonds break easily and reform if pH or temperature conditions change.
DISULFIDE BONDS
Disulfide bonds form when two cysteine molecules are close together in the structure of a polypeptide (see fig C). An oxidation reaction occurs between the two sulfur-containing groups, resulting in a strong covalent bond known as a disulfide bond. These disulfide bonds are much stronger than hydrogen bonds but they happen much less often. They are important for holding the folded polypeptide chains in place.



?-pleated sheet

hydrogen bond


disulfide bond



?-helix
? fig C Hydrogen bonds and disulfide bonds maintain the shape of protein molecules and this determines their function.

IONIC BONDS
Ionic bonds can form between some of the strongly positive and negative amino acid side chains which are sometimes found deep inside the protein molecules. They are strong bonds, but they are not as common as the other structural bonds.
Your hair is made of the protein keratin. Some methods of styling hair change the bonds within the protein molecules. Blow drying or straightening hair breaks the hydrogen bonds and temporarily reforms them with the hair curling in a different way until the hydrogen bonds reform in their original places.
Perming is a chemical treatment which is used in some hair salons to completely change the way hair looks for weeks or months. The chemicals break the disulfide bonds between the polypeptide chains and reform them in a different place. This effect is permanent – hair will stay styled in that particular way until it is cut off.

PROTEIN STRUCTURE
Proteins can be described by their primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure (see fig D).
• The primary structure of a protein is the sequence of amino acids that make up the polypeptide chain, held together by peptide bonds.
• The secondary structure of a protein is the arrangement of the polypeptide chain into a regular, repeating three-dimensional (3D) structure, held together by hydrogen bonds. One example is the right-handed helix (?-helix), a spiral coil with the peptide bonds forming the backbone and the R groups protruding in all directions. Another is the ß-pleated sheet, in which the polypeptide chain folds into regular pleats held together by hydrogen bonds between the amino and carboxyl ends of the amino acids. Most fibrous proteins have this type of structure. Sometimes there is no regular secondary structure and the polypeptide forms a random coil.


• The tertiary structure is another level of 3D organisation in addition to the secondary structure in many proteins. The amino acid chain, including any ?-helices and ?-pleated sheets, is folded further into complicated shapes. Hydrogen bonds, disulfide bonds and ionic bonds between the R
groups of nearby amino acids hold these 3D shapes in place (see page 17). Globular proteins are an example of tertiary structures.
• The quaternary structure of a protein is only found in proteins consisting of two or more polypeptide chains. The quaternary structure describes the way these separate polypeptide chains fit together in three dimensions. Examples include some very important enzymes and the blood pigment haemoglobin.
Changes in conditions such as temperature or pH affect the bonds that keep the 3D shapes of proteins in place. Even small changes can cause the bonds to break, resulting in the loss of the 3D shape of the protein. This is called denaturation. Because the 3D structure of these proteins is important to the way they work, changing conditions inside the body can cause proteins such as enzymes to stop working properly.
Primary structure the linear sequence of amino acids in a peptide.


Secondary structure the repeating pattern in the structure of the peptide chains, such as an ?-helix or ?-pleated sheets.




Tertiary structure the three-dimensional folding of the secondary structure.





Quaternary structure the three-dimensional arrangement of more than one tertiary polypeptide.


? fig D The 3D structure of proteins

FIBROUS AND GLOBULAR PROTEINS
FIBROUS PROTEINS
The complex structures of large protein molecules relate closely to their functions in the body. Fibrous proteins have little or no tertiary structure. They are long, parallel polypeptide chains with occasional cross-linkages that form them into fibres. They are insoluble in water and are very tough, which makes them ideally suited to their structural functions within organisms. Fibrous proteins appear in the structure of connective tissue in tendons and the matrix of bones, as the silk of spiders’ webs and silkworm cocoons, and as the keratin that makes up hair, nails, horns and feathers.
Collagen is a fibrous protein that gives strength to tendons, ligaments, bones and skin. It is the most common structural protein found in animals – up to 35% of the protein in your body is collagen.
Collagen is extremely strong – the fibres have a tensile strength similar to that of steel. This is due to the unusual structure of the collagen molecule. Its quaternary structure has three polypeptide chains, each up to 1000 amino acids long. The primary structure of these chains is repeating sequences
of glycine with two other amino acids – often proline and hydroxyproline. The three polypeptide
?-chains are arranged in a unique triple helix, held together by a very large number of hydrogen bonds. Collagen molecules can be up to several millimetres long and are often found together in fibrils that are held together to form collagen fibres. You can see how collagen fibres are built up in fig E.



Collagen fibres combine with the bone tissue, giving it tensile strength, in the same way as the steel rods in reinforced concrete. In the genetic disease osteogenesis imperfecta, the collagen triple helix does not develop properly. Consequently, the bone does not have as much tensile strength; it is brittle and breaks very easily.

occurs in ER lumen	occurs after secretion from cell



1
three chains assemble


2
procollagen peptidase




67 nm


precursor
?-chain



with loose ends)

collagen molecule


collagen fibril


collagen fibre

? fig E Collagen is a fibrous protein with an unusual triple helix structure and immense strength.
GLOBULAR PROTEINS
Globular proteins have complex tertiary and sometimes quaternary structures. They fold into spherical (globular) shapes. The character of the R groups on the amino acids plays an important role in the formation of globular proteins. Some R groups are hydrophobic. They repel water and will not mix or dissolve in it. They are usually found on the inside of globular proteins. Some R groups are hydrophilic – they have an affinity for water. These groups tend to be found on the outside of globular proteins. The large size of these globular protein molecules affects their behaviour in water.
The carboxyl and amino ends give them ionic properties, so you might expect them to dissolve in water and form a solution. Instead, the molecules are so big that they form a colloid. In a colloid, microscopic particles of one substance (in this case protein) are suspended throughout another substance (in this case water). They do not settle, and they cannot easily be separated. Globular proteins are important as they hold molecules in position in the cytoplasm. Globular proteins are also important in your immune system – for example, antibodies are globular proteins. Enzymes and some hormones are globular proteins and help maintain the structure of the cytoplasm (you will learn more about globular proteins as enzymes in Sections 2B.1 and 2B.2).
Haemoglobin is one of the best known globular proteins. It is a very large molecule with 574 amino acids arranged in four polypeptide chains which are connected by disulfide bonds. Each polypeptide chain surrounds an iron-containing haem group (see fig F). The iron enables the haemoglobin to bind and release oxygen molecules, and the arrangement of the polypeptide chains determines how easily the oxygen binds or is released (see Section 1B.2 to find out how haemoglobin takes up and gives up oxygen in the tissues of your body).




4 polypeptide chains bond together to make the globular structure of haemoglobin.

Each polypeptide holds one iron-containing haem group. Each haem group transports one oxygen molecule.





? fig F The complex quaternary structure of haemoglobin produces a globular protein containing four haem groups which can carry oxygen to the tissues of the body.




































































REASONING

CONJUGATED PROTEINS
The shape of a protein molecule is usually very important in its function. Some protein molecules are joined with (conjugated to) another molecule called a prosthetic group (see fig F). This structural feature usually affects the performance and functions of the molecules. These molecules are called conjugated proteins. Haemoglobin is a large protein with iron as the prosthetic group. It is a conjugated protein as well as a globular protein. Lipoproteins are formed when proteins are conjugated with lipids – you will find out more about these important biological molecules when you look at factors affecting the health of your heart in Chapter 1B.
Glycoproteins are proteins with a carbohydrate prosthetic group. The carbohydrate part of the molecule helps them to hold a lot of water and also makes it harder for protein-digesting enzymes (proteases) to break them down. Lots of lubricants used by the human body – such as mucus and the synovial fluid in the joints – are glycoproteins. Their water-holding properties make them slippery and viscous, which reduces friction. This also helps to explain why the mucus produced in the stomach protects the protein walls from digestion.
Lipoproteins are very important in the transport of cholesterol in the blood. The lipid part of the molecule enables it to combine with the lipid cholesterol. There are two main forms of lipoproteins in your blood – low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) (around 22 nm in diameter) and high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) (approximately 8–11 nm in diameter). The HDLs contain more protein than LDLs, which is partly why they are denser – proteins are more compact molecules than lipids. You will discover the impact of different lipoproteins on the risk of developing cardiovascular diseases in Section 1C.4.

PRACTICAL SKILLSCP2Testing for protein (RAP)
To test for the presence of protein, add Biuret reagent (ready-mixed 5% (w/v) sodium hydroxide solution and 1% (w/v) copper sulfate solution). A purple colour indicates the presence of protein (see fig G).












? fig G Biuret test for protein














TREHALOSE: A SUGAR FOR DRY EYES?


CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, CONTINUOUS LEARNING, INTELLECTUAL INTEREST AND CURIOSITY, COMMUNICATION, CREATIVITY

Dry eyes is a condition that is caused by dry air and over-use of air conditioning. Both of these environmental factors are common in Middle Eastern countries. Biological molecules have an amazing number of different roles in living organisms, including some you
would not expect. In this activity, you will discover how current research shows that the disaccharide trehalose can protect proteins from damage in stressful conditions. This property is being used to make dry eyes more comfortable – and possibly protect the brain from the damage that can result from ageing.


TREHALOSE: AN INTRIGUING DISACCHARIDE WITH POTENTIAL FOR MEDICAL APPLICATION IN OPHTHALMOLOGY
Abstract	HO	OH
Trehalose is a naturally occurring disaccharide comprising	O
two molecules of glucose. The sugar is widespread in many

species of plants and animals, where its function appears to be to protect cells against desiccation, but it is not found in mammals. Trehalose has the ability to protect cellular membranes and labile proteins against damage and denaturation as a result of desiccation and oxidative stress. Trehalose appears to be the most effective sugar for protection against desiccation. Although the exact mechanism by which trehalose protects labile macromolecules and lipid membranes is unknown, credible hypotheses do exist. As well as being used in large quantities
in the food industry, trehalose is used in the biopharmaceutical preservation of labile protein drugs and in the cryopreservation of human cells. Trehalose is under investigation for a number of medical applications, including the treatment of Huntington’s chorea [disease] and Alzheimer’s disease. Recent studies have shown that trehalose can also prevent damage to mammalian eyes caused by desiccation and oxidative insult. These unique properties of trehalose have thus prompted its investigation as a component in treatment for dry eye syndrome. This interesting and unique disaccharide appears to have properties which may be exploited in ophthalmology and other disease states.
Trehalose, a naturally occurring alpha-linked disaccharide formed of two molecules of glucose (fig A) … is synthesized by many living organisms, including insects, plants, fungi, and micro-organisms as a response to prolonged periods of
desiccation. This very useful property, known as anhydrobiosis, confers on an organism the ability to survive almost complete dehydration for prolonged periods and subsequently reanimate.

HO	O	OH



HO	OH	HO	OH
fig A Structure of trehalose; Registry number: 99-20-7; Molar mass: 342.296 g/mol (anhydrous); 378.33 g/mol (dihydrate); molecular structure:
?-D-glucopyranosyl ?-D-glucopyranoside (?,?-trehalose)

References
1 Iturriaga G., Suárez R., Nova-Franco B. Trehalose metabolism: From osmoprotection to signaling. Int J Mol Sci 2009; 10:3793–3810 […]
8 Elbein A.D., et al. New insights on trehalose: A multifunctional molecule. Glycobiology 2003; 13:17R–27R
11 Jain N.K., Roy I. Effect of trehalose on protein structure.
Protein Sci 2009; 18:24–36 […]
20 Matsuo T. Trehalose protects corneal epithelial cells from death by drying. Br J Ophthalmol 2001; 85:610–612 […]
30 Matsuo T., Tsuchida Y., Morimoto N. Trehalose eye drops in the treatment of dry eye syndrome. Ophthalmology 2002; 109:2024–2029
31 Matsuo T. Trehalose versus hyaluronan or cellulose in eyedrops for the treatment of dry eye. Jpn J Ophthalmol 2004; 48:321–327


From: Luyckx J., Baudouin C. Trehalose: an intriguing disaccharide with potential for medical application in ophthalmology. Clinical ophthalmology
(Auckland, NZ) 5 (2011): 577




COMMUNICATION,













1 Water is one of the most essential molecules for life.
(a) Which diagram most accurately represents a water molecule?

(e) Draw two water molecules showing the bonding between the water molecules.	[3]






1O


A



?2O


C


H2






H?2 H?1




H?1






?2O


B



?O


D


H?2






H?2 H1




H1










[1]

(Total for Question 2 = 9 marks)
3 Carbohydrates include monosaccharides, disaccharides and polysaccharides.
(a) A disaccharide can be split by:
A hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds
B condensation of glycosidic bonds
C hydrolysis of ester bonds
D condensation of ester bonds.	[1]

(b) (i)	Name the bond that occurs between two water molecules.	[1]
(ii) State the property of water that enables these
bonds to form.	[1]
(iii) These intermolecular bonds give water a property called cohesion. Describe two ways in which
cohesion is important to living things.	[2]
(c) Water has a high specific heat capacity. Assess how important this property is to living things.	[2]
(d) Explain how a molecule of sodium chloride can dissolve
in water.	[3]
(Total for Question 1 = 10 marks)
2 Water is a good solvent.
(a) Which of the following particles will not dissolve in water?
A Na+ ion
B oxygen molecule
C maltose molecule
D starch molecule	[1]
(b) Mosquito larvae live in water. They appear to be attached to the surface of the water. Which property of water enables the larvae to do this?
A Water is most dense at 4 °C
B Hydrogen bonds hold the water molecules together
C Water is a polar molecule
D Water cannot be compressed	[1]
(c) Words written in water-based ink will smudge when water is spilled on the paper. Words written in ballpoint pen are not affected.
Explain this using your knowledge of the properties
of water.	[2]
(d) It is better to use a pencil for writing if the paper may get wet. Use your knowledge of solvents to justify
this statement.	[2]
(b) 
Amylose is an example of a:
A monosaccharide
B disaccharide
C polysaccharide
D trisaccharide.	[1]
(c) Complete this table to show the components and bonding within each carbohydrate.





[6]
(Total for Question 3 = 8 marks)
4 Disaccharides and polysaccharides consist of monosaccharides joined together.
(a) Name the bond holding the monosaccharides together.
A ionic
B ester
C glycosidic
D hydrogen	[1]
(b) What is the function of starch molecules?
A provide a source of energy for plants
B store energy in all living organisms
C store energy in plants
D store energy in animals	[1]
(c) A disaccharide can be hydrolysed to its two monosaccharides. Explain the term hydrolysis.	[2]
(d) State the role of glycogen molecules and explain why they are well suited to the role.	[5]
(Total for Question 4 = 9 marks)





5 (a) Which is the best description of an amino acid?
A contains the elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen
B an amino group at one end and a carboxyl group at the other end
C a small molecule containing peptide bonds
D an amino group with an R group attached	[1]
(b) Proteins are polymers of amino acids joined by peptide bonds formed between the:
A R groups
B R group and the amino group
C R group and the carboxyl group
D carboxyl group and the amino group.	[1]
(c) Collagen and haemoglobin are both proteins that have a primary structure consisting of amino acids joined together by peptide bonds.
(i) Explain what is meant by the term primary structure
of a protein.	[1]
(ii) Name the type of reaction that occurs when a peptide bond is broken causing a dipeptide to split into two amino acids.	[1]
(d) Collagen contains the amino acids glycine and serine. The diagram below shows a dipeptide formed from these two amino acids.
6 
(a) Complete the table below describing the different levels of protein structure (primary, secondary, tertiary, or
quaternary structure).	[4]


DescriptionLevel of protein structure (primary, secondary, tertiary, or quaternary)Hydrophobic amino acids such as proline are not found on the surface of protein moleculeThe molecule contains three polypeptide chainsThe protein molecule contains short helical sections separated by pleated sheets40% of the amino acids in the molecule are glutamine(b) Amino acids contain a residual or R group.
Describe how the R group can affect the structure
of a protein.	[4]
(c) Explain, using examples, why globular proteins are
more metabolically active than fibrous proteins.	[4]
(Total for Question 6 = 12 marks)

H	O
N	C	C	N	C	C
H	OH
CH2
OH



H	H	O
N	C	C	1
H	H	OH
Glycine	Serine
Complete the diagram to show the structure of serine
when the peptide bond breaks.	[1]
(e) In the table below give three structural differences between the molecules of collagen and haemoglobin.




[3]
(Total for Question 5 = 8 marks)


If a car breaks down, mechanics can replace worn-out parts, put in new oil and transmission fluid, or change perished or worn-out pipes. We do not expect doctors to be able to do the same for our bodies. But they can do a lot to replace or repair the various parts of the circulatory system. The heart can have new valves, new blood vessels to supply the muscle and can even be replaced in a transplant. The blood vessels can be opened up, unblocked or replaced with grafts from other healthy areas of the body. Blood can be replaced by transfusions, and the bone marrow that makes the blood cells can be replaced by transplants. Doctors have even developed techniques by which they can operate on the circulatory system of a fetus in the uterus, to give blood transfusions or repair some heart conditions long before birth.
In this chapter, you will be looking at mammalian transport systems. This involves studying the general principles of circulatory systems and why larger organisms need a complex circulatory system. You will learn about the details of the human blood, blood vessels and heart.
You will consider how blood fluid and blood cells help to transport gases and other substances in the blood and how haemoglobin – the pigment which carries oxygen – attracts oxygen and then releases it when and where it is needed. You will discover the way that the blood vessels are well adapted to their roles in different parts of the circulatory system and what can go wrong if they are not healthy. Finally, you will learn about the heart as a complex organ with a well-coordinated cycle of contraction.
MATHS SKILLS FOR THIS CHAPTER
• Recognise and make use of appropriate units in calculations (e.g. work out the unit for the heart rate)
• Find arithmetic means (e.g. measuring mean heart rate)
• Construct and interpret frequency tables and diagrams, bar charts and histograms (e.g. explain volume and pressure changes in the heart chambers)
• Substitute numerical values into algebraic equations using appropriate units for physical quantities
(e.g. calculating the volumes of cubes and spheres)
• Solve algebraic equations in a biological context (e.g. surface area to volume ratios)
• Calculate the circumferences, surface areas and volumes of regular shapes (e.g. work out the approximate surface area and volume of a single cell)
• Use ratios, fractions and percentages (e.g. calculate surface area to volume ratio of a single cell, compare the thickness of the wall of the heart chambers)







What prior knowledge do I need?
• The human circulatory system and how it is related to the gas exchange system
• How the structure of the heart and the blood vessels are adapted to their functions
• How red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets and plasma are adapted to their functions in the blood
• How oxygen and carbon dioxide move between the air in the lungs and the blood
• Why specific transport systems are needed as organisms get larger and have higher metabolic rates

What will I study in this topic?
• The need for a circulatory system in larger and more complex organisms
• The importance of the surface area to volume ratio of larger organisms
• The advantages of a double circulation in mammals over the single circulatory system in fish
• The structure of the blood including the different cells, plasma and platelets and their functions in transport
• The role of platelets and plasma proteins in blood clotting
• The transport of oxygen in the blood, the roles of haemoglobin, fetal haemoglobin and the effect of carbon dioxide concentrations on the transport of oxygen
• The structure of the heart, arteries, veins and capillaries related to their functions
• The sequence of events of the cardiac cycle
• How blood vessels can become damaged by atherosclerosis and its effect on health





What will I study later?
Chapter 1C
• The risk factors for cardiovascular disease
• Treatments for cardiovascular disease Chapter 2A
• Movement of gases into and out of the blood in the lungs
• Diffusion and osmosis Chapter 2C
• Inheritance of blood groups Chapter 3C
• Bone marrow as a source of blood cells and stem cells
• How stem cells from the bone marrow can have therapeutic uses Chapter 4A
• Transport systems in plants Chapter 6B (Book 2: IAL)
• Role of blood in immunity Topic 7 (Book 2: IAL)
• The role of the blood in homeostasis
• The transport of heat in thermoregulation
• The movement of substances out of and into the blood in the nephrons of the kidney
• The role of the blood in transporting hormones
• The effect of hormones such as adrenaline on the circulatory system
• Coordination of the cardiac cycle
• The control of the heart rate by the nervous system
• Cardiac output












THE NEED FOR TRANSPORT
• Within any organism, substances need to be moved from one place to another. One of the main ways substances move into and out of cells is by diffusion. Diffusion is the free movement of particles in a liquid or a gas down a concentration gradient. This movement is from an area where the particles are at a relatively high concentration to an area where they are at a relatively low concentration (see Section 2A.2).
In single-celled organisms and microscopic multicellular organisms, diffusion is sufficient to supply all their needs. However, when organisms reach a certain size, diffusion alone is not enough.
TRANSPORT IN SMALL ORGANISMS
For a single-celled organism like an amoeba and for very small multicellular organisms including many marine larvae, the nutrients and oxygen that they need can diffuse directly into the cells from the external environment and waste substances can diffuse directly out.

MODELLING SURFACE AREA : VOLUME RATIOS
The surface area to volume ratio of an organism is the key factor that determines whether diffusion alone will allow substances
to move into and out of all the cells rapidly enough. However, it is not easy to calculate the surface area to volume ratio of
organisms such as elephants, people and palm trees. It is difficult even for a single-celled Amoeba because of its irregular shape.
So scientists use models to help show what happens in the real situation (see fig B). A simple cube makes surface area to volume calculations easy. The bigger the organism gets, the smaller the surface area to volume ratio becomes. The distance from the outside of the organism to the inside gets longer, and there is proportionately less surface for substances to enter through. So it takes longer for substances to diffuse in, and they may not reach the individual cells quickly enough to supply all their needs.
Smaller surface area compared to volume.


Larger surface area compared to volume.
	


This works well for the following reasons.
1 
mm cube
2 
mm cube	4 mm cube

• The diffusion distances from the outside to the innermost areas of the cells are very small.
• The surface area in contact with the outside environment is very

Surface area	6 sides 3 12
5 6 mm2
Volume	13 5 1 mm3

6 sides 3 22
5 24 mm2
23 5 8 mm3

6 sides 3 42
5 96 mm2
43 5 64 mm3

large when compared to the volume of the inside of the organism. Its surface area to volume ratio (sa : vol) is large, so there is a relatively big surface area over which substances can diffuse into or out of the organism (see figs A and B).
• The metabolic demands are low – the organisms do not regulate their own temperature and the cells do not use much oxygen and

Surface area to volume ratio

6 : 1

3 : 1

3 : 2

food or produce much carbon dioxide.
Single-celled organisms and very small multicellular organisms do

radius
Surface area

0.5 µm

1 µm	2 µm

not need specialised transport systems because diffusion is enough to supply their needs.

4pr2
Volume
4pr3
Surface area to volume ratio

3.14 µm2

0.52 µm3
6 : 1

12.57 µm2

4.19 µm3
3 : 1

50.27 µm2

33.51 µm3
3 : 2








? fig A The surface area : volume ratio of this tiny jellyfish larva is relatively large so simple diffusion can supply all its needs.

? fig B In this diagram, the cubes and spheres represent models of organisms.





THE NEED FOR TRANSPORT IN MULTICELLULAR ANIMALS
Within a large multicellular organism, many chemical reactions take place inside every microscopic cell. These cells require a supply of chemical substances such as glucose and oxygen for cellular respiration. These must be transported from outside a large organism into the cells. Respiration supplies energy for the other reactions of life, but it also produces the toxic waste
product carbon dioxide. This and other waste products need to be removed from the cells before they cause damage to them.
Large multicellular organisms have internal transport systems that carry substances to every cell in the body. These systems deliver oxygen and nutrients and remove waste so that cells can carry out their functions efficiently. In large complex animals such as humans, chemicals made in a cell in one part of the body – such as a hormone like insulin or adrenaline – may influence a different type of cell elsewhere in the body. So substances made internally need to be moved around the body as well.
In many animals, including all the vertebrates, this transport

system with the blood contained within tubes. The blood makes a continuous journey out to the most distant parts of the body and back to the heart.

Animals such as fish have a single circulation system (see fig C). The heart pumps deoxygenated blood to the gills, the organs of gas exchange where the blood takes in oxygen (becomes oxygenated) and gives up carbon dioxide at the same time. The
blood then travels on around the rest of the body of the fish, giving up oxygen to the body cells before returning to the heart.
aorta

system is the heart and circulatory system and the fluid that flows through it. This is an example of a mass transport system – substances are transported in the flow of a fluid with a mechanism for moving it around the body. All large complex organisms have some form of mass transport system which overcomes the limits of diffusion between the internal and external environments.
Substances are delivered over short distances from the mass

gill capillaries









ventricle	atrium

systemic capillaries

transport system to individual cells deep in the body by processes such as diffusion, osmosis and active transport.
FEATURES OF MASS TRANSPORT SYSTEMS
Mass transport systems are very effective for moving substances around the body. Most mass transport systems have certain features which are the same. They have:
• exchange surfaces to get materials into and out of the transport system
• a system of vessels that carry substances – these are usually tubes, sometimes following a very specific route, sometimes widespread and branching
• a way of making sure that substances are moved in the right direction (e.g. nutrients in and waste out)
• a way of moving materials fast enough to supply the needs of the organism – this may involve mechanical methods such as the pumping of the heart or ways of maintaining a concentration gradient so that substances move quickly from one place to another (e.g. using active transport)
• a suitable transport medium (e.g. fluid)
• in many cases, a way of adapting the rate of transport to the needs of the organism.
CIRCULATION SYSTEMS
Many animals have a circulatory system in which a heart pumps blood around the body. Insects have an open circulatory system with the blood circulating in large open spaces. However, most larger animals, including mammals, have a closed circulatory

? fig C The single circulation of a fish

Birds and mammals need much more oxygen than fish. Not only do they have to move around without the support of water, but they also maintain a constant body temperature that may be higher or lower than their surroundings. This takes a lot of resources, so their cells need plenty of oxygen and glucose and make waste products that need to be removed quickly. Birds
and mammals have evolved the most complex type of transport system, known as a double circulation because it involves two separate circulation systems. The systemic circulation carries oxygenated blood (oxygen-rich blood) from the heart to the cells of the body where the oxygen is used. It also carries
the deoxygenated blood (blood that has given up its oxygen to the body cells) back to the heart. The pulmonary circulation carries deoxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs to be oxygenated and then carries the oxygenated blood back to the heart (see fig D).
The separate circuits of a double circulatory system ensure that the oxygenated and deoxygenated blood cannot mix, so the tissues receive as much oxygen as possible. Another big advantage is that the fully oxygenated blood can be delivered quickly to the body tissues at high pressure. The blood going through the tiny blood vessels in the lungs is at relatively low pressure, so it does


not damage the vessels and allows gas exchange to take place. If this oxygenated blood at low pressure went straight into the big vessels that carry it around the body, it would move very slowly. However, the oxygenated blood returns to the heart, so it can be pumped hard and sent around the body at high pressure. This means it reaches all the tiny capillaries between the body cells quickly, supplying oxygen for an active way of life.


veins returning to the heart

capillary beds in tissue




pulmonary artery carrying
blood to the lungs

pulmonary circulation





lungs

arteries to head




arteries to the upper body and head






pulmonary vein carrying blood back to the heart








heart – the pump which forces blood around the body





aorta – the major artery leaving
the heart

systemic circulation





arteries to the body



deoxygenated blood oxygenated blood


capillary beds in tissue

? fig D A double circulation sends blood at high pressure, carrying lots of oxygen, to the active cells of the body. Take note: this is a schematic diagram. In a real double circulation, all of the blood vessels enter and leave from the top of the heart.














In mammals, the mass transport system is the cardiovascular system. This is made up of a series of vessels with the heart as a pump to move blood through the vessels. The blood is the transport medium and its passage through the vessels is called
the circulation. The system delivers the materials needed by the cells of the body, and carries away the waste products of their metabolism. Substances move between the plasma or red blood cells and the body cells by diffusion or by active transport (see Section 2A.4). The tiniest blood vessels have walls only one cell thick, so diffusion distances are short and substances pass easily across these into other cells. Every cell in the body is near one of these small vessels. The blood also carries out other functions, such as carrying hormones (chemical messages) from one part
of the body to another, forming part of the defence system of the body and distributing heat.

THE COMPONENTS OF THE BLOOD AND THEIR MAIN FUNCTIONS
You are going to study all three parts of the cardiovascular system, starting with the transport medium – the blood. Your blood is a complex mixture carrying a wide variety of cells and substances to all areas of your body (see fig A).

? fig A This light micrograph shows red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets.

PLASMA
Your blood plasma is the fluid part of your mass transport system. Over 50% of your blood volume is plasma, and it carries all of your blood cells and everything else that needs transporting around your body. This includes:
• digested food products (e.g. glucose and amino acids) from the small intestine to the liver and then to all the parts of the body where they are needed either for immediate use or storage
• nutrient molecules from storage areas to the cells that need them
• excretory products (e.g. carbon dioxide and urea) from cells to the organs such as the lungs or kidneys that excrete them from the body
• chemical messages (hormones) from where they are made to where they cause changes in the body.
The plasma helps to maintain a steady body temperature by transferring heat around the system from internal organs (e.g. the gut) or very active tissues (e.g. leg muscles in someone running) to the skin, where it can be lost to the surroundings. It also acts as a buffer to regulate pH changes.

ERYTHROCYTES (RED BLOOD CELLS)
There are approximately 5 million erythrocytes per mm3 of blood (4–5 million per mm3 in women, 5–6 million per mm3 in men).
They contain haemoglobin, a red pigment that carries oxygen and gives them their colour (see Section 1A.5). They are made in the bone marrow. Mature erythrocytes do not contain a nucleus and have a limited life of about 120 days.
The erythrocytes transport oxygen from the lungs to all the cells. They are well adapted for their function. The biconcave disc shape of the cells means that they have a large surface area to volume ratio, so oxygen can diffuse into and out of them rapidly (see fig B). Having no nucleus leaves much more space inside the cells for the haemoglobin molecules that carry the oxygen. In fact, each red blood cell contains around 250–300 million molecules of haemoglobin and can carry approximately 1000 million molecules of oxygen. Haemoglobin also carries some of the carbon dioxide produced in respiration back to the lungs. The rest is transported in the plasma.











? fig B Healthy red blood cells have a biconcave disc shape.
LEUCOCYTES (WHITE BLOOD CELLS)
Leucocytes or white blood cells are much larger than erythrocytes, but can also squeeze through tiny blood vessels because they can change their shape. There are around 4000– 11 000 per mm3 of blood and there are several different types. They are made in the bone marrow, although some mature in the thymus gland. Their main function is to defend the body against
infection. Leucocytes are also very important in the inflammatory response of the body when an area of tissue is damaged. They all contain a nucleus and have colourless cytoplasm, although some types contain granules which can be stained. There are several different types of leucocyte, which you will study further in
Book 2 Chapter 6B.
PLATELETS
Platelets are tiny fragments of large cells called megakaryocytes, which are found in the bone marrow. There are about 150 000–400 000 platelets per mm3 of blood. They are involved in blood clotting (see page 35).

TRANSPORT OF OXYGEN
The many haemoglobin molecules that are in the red blood cells transport oxygen. Each haemoglobin molecule is a large globular protein consisting of four peptide chains, each with an iron-containing prosthetic group. Each group can collect four molecules of oxygen in a reversible process to form oxyhaemoglobin:
	Hb + 4O2 ? Hb.4O2	
haemoglobin + oxygen ? oxyhaemoglobin
The first oxygen molecule that binds to the haemoglobin changes the arrangement of the molecule making it easier for the following oxygen molecules to bind. The final oxygen molecule binds several hundred times faster than the first. The same process happens
in reverse when oxygen dissociates from haemoglobin – it gets progressively harder to remove the oxygen.

When the blood enters the lungs, the concentration of oxygen in the red blood cells is relatively low. Oxygen moves into the red blood cells from the air in the lungs by diffusion. The oxygen is collected and bound to the haemoglobin, so the free oxygen concentration in the cytoplasm of the red blood cells stays low.
This maintains a steep concentration gradient from the air in the lungs to the red blood cells, so more and more oxygen diffuses in and joins onto the haemoglobin.

The oxygen levels are relatively low in the body tissues. The concentration of oxygen in the cytoplasm of the red blood cells is higher than in the surrounding tissue. As a result, oxygen
moves out into the body cells by diffusion down its concentration gradient. The haemoglobin molecules give up some of their oxygen. When you are at rest or exercising gently, only about 25% of the oxygen carried by the haemoglobin is released into your cells. There is another 75% in reserve in the transport system for when you are very active.
The strong affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen means that a small change in the proportion of oxygen in the surrounding environment can have a big effect on the saturation of the blood
with oxygen. So in the lungs, the haemoglobin rapidly gains oxygen and in the tissues, as the oxygen saturation of the environment falls, oxygen is released rapidly (see fig C).
As deoxygenated blood approaches the lungs, the steep part of the curve means that a small increase in partial pressure causes a large increase in
% saturation.
100






50






0
Partial pressure of oxygen
As oxygenated blood approaches the tissues, a small decrease in partial pressure causes a large decrease in % saturation (i.e. a large release of oxygen).
? fig C  Oxygen dissociation curve for human haemoglobin

TRANSPORT OF CARBON DIOXIDE
Waste carbon dioxide diffuses from the respiring cells of the body tissues into the blood along a concentration gradient. The
reaction of the carbon dioxide with water is crucial. When carbon dioxide is dissolved in the blood it reacts slowly with the water to form carbonic acid, H2CO3. The carbonic acid separates to form hydrogen ions H+ and hydrogencarbonate ions HCO –:
CO2 + H2O ? H2CO3 ? HCO – + H+
About 5% of the carbon dioxide is carried in solution in the plasma. A further 10–20% combines with haemoglobin molecules to make carbaminohaemoglobin. Most of the carbon
dioxide is transported in the cytoplasm of the red blood cells as hydrogencarbonate ions. The enzyme carbonic anhydrase controls the rate of the reaction between carbon dioxide and water to produce carbonic acid.
In the body tissues, there is a high concentration of carbon dioxide in the blood, so carbonic anhydrase catalyses the formation of carbonic acid.



In the lungs, the carbon dioxide concentration is low, so carbonic anhydrase catalyses the reverse reaction and free carbon dioxide diffuses out of the blood and into the lungs (see fig D).




tissue cells

CO2

CO2

+ H2O

H2CO3


HHb


H+  HCO –
Hb




Cl–





plasma

erythrocyte



plasma

? fig D The transport of carbon dioxide from the tissues to the lungs depends on the reaction of carbon dioxide with water, controlled by an enzyme in the red blood cells.
THE BOHR EFFECT
The way in which haemoglobin collects and releases oxygen is also affected by the proportion of carbon dioxide in the tissues (see fig E). When the proportion of carbon dioxide in the tissues is high, the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen is reduced. In other words, haemoglobin needs higher levels of oxygen to become saturated and releases oxygen much more easily. So in active tissues with high carbon dioxide levels, haemoglobin releases oxygen more readily. Carbon dioxide levels in the lung capillaries are relatively low, which makes it easier for oxygen to bind to the haemoglobin. The changes in the oxygen dissociation curve that result as the carbon dioxide level changes are known as the Bohr effect.


100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0	2	4	6






8	10	12

Partial pressure of oxygen/kPa
? fig E As the proportion of carbon dioxide in the environment rises, the haemoglobin curve moves down and to the right, so it gives up oxygen more easily. This is known as the Bohr effect.

FETAL HAEMOGLOBIN
A fetus in the uterus depends on its mother to supply it with oxygen. Oxygenated blood from the mother flows through the placenta close to the deoxygenated fetal blood. If the blood of the fetus had the same affinity for oxygen as the blood of the mother, very little oxygen would be transferred. Fortunately, the blood of the fetus contains a special form of the oxygen-carrying pigment called fetal haemoglobin. Fetal haemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen than the adult haemoglobin of the mother. Consequently, the fetal haemoglobin can remove oxygen from the maternal blood even when the proportion of oxygen is relatively low (see fig F). The maternal and fetal blood also run in


opposite directions. This makes the oxygen concentration gradient between the mother’s blood and that of her fetus as steep as possible, maximising the oxygen transfer to the blood of the fetus.


100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
















0	2	4	6
















8	10	12

Partial pressure of oxygen/kPa
? fig F Fetal haemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen than the adult haemoglobin of the mother, so it can take oxygen from the mother’s blood and deliver it to the cells of the growing fetus.



THE CLOTTING OF THE BLOOD
You have a limited volume of blood. In theory, a minor cut could endanger life as the torn blood vessels allow blood to escape. First, your blood volume will reduce and if you lose too much blood, you will die. Second, pathogens can get into your body through an open wound. In normal circumstances, your body protects you through the clotting mechanism of the blood. This mechanism seals damaged blood vessels to minimise blood loss and prevent pathogens getting in.
FORMING A CLOT
Plasma, blood cells and platelets flow from a cut vessel. Contact between the platelets and components of the tissue (e.g. collagen fibres in the skin) causes the platelets to break open in large numbers. They release several substances, two of which are particularly important.
• Serotonin causes the smooth muscle of the blood vessel to contract. This narrows the blood vessels, cutting off the blood flow to the damaged area.
• Thromboplastin is an enzyme that starts a sequence of chemical changes that clot the blood (see fig H).

damaged tissues
release
plateletsrelease










catalyses

forms

? fig H The cascade of events that results in a life-saving or life-threatening clot. When you cut yourself, this is the process which seals the blood vessels and protects the delicate new tissues that form underneath.
THE BLOOD CLOTTING PROCESS
The blood clotting process is a very complex sequence of events in which there are many different clotting factors. Vitamin K is important in the production of many of the compounds needed for the blood to clot, including prothrombin. Here is a simple version of the events in the blood clotting process.
1 Thromboplastin catalyses the conversion of a large soluble protein called prothrombin found in the plasma into another soluble protein, the enzyme called thrombin. Prothrombin is biologically inactive while thrombin is biologically active – prothrombin is a precursor of thrombin. This conversion happens on a large scale at the site of a wound. Calcium ions need to be present in the blood at the right concentration for this reaction to happen.
2 Thrombin acts on another soluble plasma protein called fibrinogen, converting it to an insoluble substance called fibrin. Again, fibrinogen is the biologically inactive precursor of biologically active fibrin. The fibrin forms a mesh of fibres to cover the wound.


3 More platelets and red blood cells pouring from the wound get trapped in the fibrin mesh. This forms a clot.
4 Special proteins in the structure of the platelets contract, making the clot tighter and tougher to form a scab that protects the skin and vessels underneath as they heal.
In a sequence such as clot formation, a small event is amplified through a series of steps. However, sometimes the body’s clotting mechanism is started in the wrong place, and this can lead to serious problems in the blood vessels. A clot in the vessels that supply your heart muscle with blood can cause a heart attack and a clot in the brain can cause a stroke (see Section 1B.5).




CRITICAL THINKING








SUBJECT VOCABULARY
cardiovascular system the mass transport system of the body made up of a series of vessels with a pump (the heart) to move blood through the vessels
circulation the passage of blood through the blood vessels
active transport the movement of substances into or out of the cell using ATP produced during cellular respiration
buffer a solution which resists changes in pH
leucocytes white blood cells; there are several different types which play important roles in defending the body against the entry of pathogens and in the immune system
platelets cell fragments involved in the clotting mechanism of the blood megakaryocytes large cells that are found in the bone marrow and produce platelets oxyhaemoglobin the molecule formed when oxygen binds to haemoglobin
carbaminohaemoglobin the molecule formed when carbon dioxide combines with haemoglobin carbonic anhydrase the enzyme that controls the rate of the reaction between carbon dioxide and water to produce carbonic acid
Bohr effect the name given to changes in the oxygen dissociation curve of haemoglobin that occur due to a rise in carbon dioxide levels and a reduction of the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen
fetal haemoglobin a form of haemoglobin found only in the developing fetus with a higher affinity for oxygen than adult haemoglobin
serotonin a chemical that causes the smooth muscle of the blood vessels to contract, narrowing them and cutting off the blood flow to the damaged area
thromboplastin an enzyme that sets in progress a cascade of events that leads to the formation of a blood clot
prothrombin a large, soluble protein found in the plasma that is the precursor to an enzyme called thrombin
thrombin an enzyme that acts on fibrinogen, converting it to fibrin during clot formation
precursor a biologically inactive molecule which can be converted into a closely related biologically active molecule when needed
fibrinogen a soluble plasma protein which is the precursor of the insoluble protein fibrin
fibrin an insoluble protein formed from fibrinogen by the action of thrombin that forms a mesh of fibres that trap erythrocytes and platelets to form a blood clot











THE BLOOD VESSELS
The blood vessels that make up the circulatory system can be thought of as the biological equivalent of a road transport system. The arteries and veins are like the large roads carrying heavy traffic while the narrow town streets and tracks are represented by the vast area of branching and spreading capillaries called the capillary network. In the capillary network, substances carried by the blood are exchanged with cells in the same way that products are transported from factories, oil refineries or farms and distributed into shops and homes. The structures of the different types of blood vessel closely reflect their functions in your body.
ARTERIES
Arteries carry blood away from your heart towards the cells of your body. The structure of an artery is shown in fig A. Almost all arteries carry oxygenated blood. The exceptions are:
• the pulmonary artery – carrying deoxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs
• the umbilical artery – during pregnancy, this carries deoxygenated blood from the fetus to the placenta.
The arteries leaving the heart branch off in every direction, and the diameter of the lumen, the central space inside the blood vessel, gets smaller the further away it is from the heart. The very smallest branches of the arterial system, furthest from the heart, are the arterioles.


external layer of tough tissue




The middle layers of the artery wall contain
elastic fibres and smooth muscle; arteries nearest the heart have more elastic fibres, those further from the heart have a greater
proportion of muscle tissue.



tough outer layer


endothelium





Lumen is small when artery unstretched by flow of blood from heart.

The endothelium forms a smooth lining which allows the easiest possible flow of blood.


elastic fibres and smooth muscle


lumen

? fig A The structure of an artery means it is adapted to cope with the surging of the blood as the heart pumps.
Blood is pumped out from the heart in a regular rhythm, about 70 times a minute. Each heartbeat sends a high-pressure flow of blood into the arteries. The major arteries close to the heart must withstand these pressure surges. Their walls contain a lot of elastic fibres, so they can stretch to accommodate the greater volume of blood without being damaged (see fig B). Between surges, the elastic fibres return to their original length, squeezing the blood to move it along in a continuous flow. The pulse you can feel in an artery is the effect of the surge each time the heart beats. The blood pressure in all arteries is relatively high, but it falls in arteries further away from the heart. These are known as the peripheral arteries.










In the peripheral arteries, the muscle fibres in the vessel walls contract or relax to change the size of the lumen, controlling the blood flow. The smaller the lumen, the harder it is for blood to flow through the vessel. This controls the amount of blood that flows into an organ, so regulating its activity. You will find out more about this important response in Book 2 Topic 7.
aorta

elastic fibres smooth muscle collagen fibres

can diffuse between cells and the blood quickly. Also, because the diameter of each individual capillary is small, the blood
travels relatively slowly through them, giving more opportunity for diffusion to occur (see fig C). The smallest capillary is no wider than a single red blood cell.
Capillaries have a very simple structure which is well adapted to their function. Their walls are very thin and contain no elastic fibres, smooth muscle or collagen. This helps them fit between
individual cells and allows rapid diffusion of substances between the blood and the cells. The walls consist of just one very thin cell. Oxygen and other molecules, such as digested food molecules and hormones, quickly diffuse out of the blood in the capillaries into the nearby body cells, and carbon dioxide and other waste molecules diffuse into the capillaries. Blood entering the capillary network from the arteries is oxygenated. When it leaves, it carries less oxygen and more carbon dioxide.




medium-sized artery






arteriole


elastic fibres smooth muscle collagen fibres





elastic fibres




30 µm


smooth muscle collagen fibres



? fig C The very thin walls of capillaries allow rapid diffusion of oxygen, carbon dioxide and digested food molecules. The lumen is just wide

? fig B The relative proportions of different tissues in different arteries. Collagen gives general strength and flexibility to both arteries and veins.



CAPILLARIES
Arterioles lead into networks of capillaries. These are very small vessels that spread throughout the tissues of the body. The capillary network links the arterioles and the venules. Capillaries branch between cells – no cell is far from a capillary, so substances

enough for red blood cells to pass through.
VEINS
Veins carry blood back towards the heart. Most veins carry deoxygenated blood. The exceptions are:
• the pulmonary vein – carrying oxygen-rich blood from the lungs back to the heart for circulation around the body
• the umbilical vein – during pregnancy, it carries oxygenated blood from the placenta into the fetus.
Tiny venules lead from the capillary network, combining into larger and larger vessels going back to the heart (see fig D).





smooth inner surface









outer tough layer consisting mainly of collagen fibres

relatively thin layer of smooth muscle with few elastic fibres







relatively large lumen


semilunar valve open













vein




muscle contracted



Blood moving in the direction of the heart forces the valve open, allowing the blood to flow through.


vein



artery

semilunar valve shut



muscle relaxed



? fig D The arrangement of tissues in a vein reflects the pressure of blood in the vessel.
Eventually only two veins (sometimes called the great veins) carry the blood from the body tissues back to the heart – the inferior vena cava from the lower parts of the body and the superior vena cava from the upper parts of the body.
Veins can hold a large volume of blood – in fact more than half of the body’s blood volume is in the veins at any one time. They act as a blood reservoir. The blood pressure in the veins is relatively low – the pressure surges from the heart are eliminated before the blood reaches the capillary system. This blood at low pressure must be returned to the heart and lungs to be oxygenated again and recirculated.
The blood is not pumped back to the heart, it returns to the heart by means of muscle pressure and one-way valves.
• Many of the larger veins are situated between the large muscle blocks of the body, particularly in the arms and legs. When the muscles contract during physical activity they squeeze these veins. The valves (see below) keep the blood travelling
in one direction and this squeezing helps to return the blood to the heart.
• There are one-way valves at frequent intervals throughout the venous system. These are called semilunar valves because of their half-moon shape. They develop from
infoldings of the inner wall of the vein. Blood can pass through towards the heart, but if it starts to flow backwards the valves close, preventing any backflow (see fig E).







A backflow of blood will close the valve, ensuring that blood cannot flow away from the heart.
? fig E Valves in the veins make sure blood only flows in one direction – towards the heart. The contraction of large muscles encourages blood flow through the veins.
The main types of blood vessel – the arteries, veins and capillaries – have very different characteristics. These affect the way the blood flows through the body, and what the vessels do in the body. Some of these differences are summarised in fig F.
high

low
 large		small	arterioles capillaries venules	veins arteries	arteries
? fig F Graph to show the surface area of each major type of blood vessel in your body, along with the velocity and pressure of the blood travelling in them.








ANALYSIS













In most animal transport systems, the heart is the organ that moves the blood around the body. In mammals, the heart is a complex, four-chambered muscular organ that sits in the chest protected by the ribs and sternum. In an average lifetime, the heart beats about 3 000 000 000 (3 × 109) times and will pump over 200 million litres of blood – quite a workload.

THE STRUCTURE OF THE HEART
The human heart, like other mammalian hearts (see fig A), is not a single muscular pump but two pumps, joined and working in time together. The right side of the heart receives blood from the body and pumps it to the lungs. The left side of the heart receives blood from the lungs and pumps it to the body. The blood in each side of the heart does not mix with the blood from the other side. The two sides are separated by a thick, muscular septum. The heart is made of a unique type of muscle, known as cardiac muscle, which has special properties – it can carry on contracting regularly without resting or getting fatigued. You will study this in more detail in Book 2 Topic 7. Cardiac muscle has a good blood supply – the coronary arteries bring oxygenated blood to the tissue (see
fig B). It also contains lots of myoglobin, a respiratory pigment which has a stronger affinity for oxygen than haemoglobin. This myoglobin stores oxygen for the respiration needed to keep the heart contracting regularly.






right pulmonary artery (to right lung)

carotid arteries
to neck and head




aorta



left pulmonary artery (to left lung)





superior vena cava


right pulmonary vein (from right lung)


semilunar valve right atrium

tricuspid valve

left pulmonary vein (from left lung)

left atrium semilunar valve bicuspid valve
tendinous cords




inferior vena cava






thinner cardiac muscle of right ventricle




aorta








septum

thick cardiac muscle of left ventricle


apex of heart




? fig B The coronary arteries, which you can clearly see here, carry oxygenated blood from the aorta to the heart muscle,

? fig A The structure of the human heart

providing it with oxygen and digested food and removing carbon dioxide.




THE ACTION OF THE HEART


1 The inferior vena cava collects deoxygenated blood from the lower parts of the body, while the superior vena cava receives deoxygenated blood from the head, neck, arms and chest. Deoxygenated blood is delivered to the right atrium.
2 The right atrium receives the blood from the great veins. As it fills with blood, the pressure builds up and opens the tricuspid valve, so the right ventricle starts to fill with blood too. When the atrium is full it contracts, forcing more blood into the ventricle. The atrium has thin muscular walls because it receives blood at low pressure from the inferior vena cava and the superior vena cava and it needs to exert relatively little pressure to move the blood into the ventricle. One-
way semilunar valves (like the valves in veins described in Section 1B.3) at the entrance to the atrium stop a backflow of blood into the veins.
3 The tricuspid valve consists of three flaps and is also known as an atrioventricular valve because it separates an atrium from a ventricle. The valve allows blood to pass from the atrium to the ventricle, but not in the other direction. The tough tendinous cords, also known as valve tendons or heartstrings, make sure the valves are not turned inside out by the pressure exerted when the ventricles contract.
4 The right ventricle is filled with blood under some pressure when the right atrium contracts, then the ventricle contracts. Its muscular walls produce the pressure needed to force blood out of the heart into the pulmonary arteries. These carry the deoxygenated blood to the capillaries in the lungs. As the ventricle starts to contract, the tricuspid valve closes to prevent blood flowing into the atrium. Semilunar valves, like those in veins, prevent the blood flowing back from the arteries into
the ventricle.
5 The blood returns from the lungs to the left side of the heart in the pulmonary veins. The blood is at relatively low pressure after passing through the extensive capillaries of the lungs. The blood returns to the left atrium, another thin-walled chamber that performs the same function as the right atrium. It contracts to force blood into the left ventricle. Backflow is prevented by another atrioventricular valve known as the bicuspid valve, which has only two flaps.
6 As the left atrium contracts, the bicuspid valve opens and the left ventricle is filled with blood under pressure. As the left ventricle starts to contract the bicuspid valve closes to prevent backflow of blood to the left atrium. The left ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart and into the aorta, the major artery of the body. This carries blood away from the heart at even higher pressure than the major arteries that branch off from it.
The muscular wall of the left side of the heart is much thicker than that of the right. The right side pumps blood to the lungs,

which are relatively close to the heart. The delicate capillaries of the lungs need blood delivered at relatively low pressure. The left side must produce sufficient force to move the blood under pressure to all the extremities of the body and overcome the elastic recoil of the arteries. Semilunar valves prevent the blood flowing back from the aorta into the ventricle.

The septum is a thick wall of muscle and connective tissue between the two sides of the heart. It prevents the oxygenated blood mixing with the deoxygenated blood.




HOW YOUR HEART WORKS
The beating of your heart produces the sounds that are your heartbeat. The sounds are not made by the contracting of the heart muscle but by the heart valves closing. The two sounds of a heartbeat are often described as ‘lub-dub’. The first sound
(‘lub’) comes when the ventricles contract and the blood is forced against the atrioventricular valves. The second sound (‘dub’) comes when the ventricles relax and a backflow of blood hits the semilunar valves in the pulmonary artery and aorta. The rate of your heartbeat shows how frequently your heart is contracting.
THE CARDIAC CYCLE
Your heart is continuously contracting then relaxing. The contraction of the heart is called systole. Systole can be divided into atrial systole, when the atria contract together forcing blood into the ventricles, and ventricular systole, when the ventricles contract. Ventricular systole happens about 0.13 seconds after atrial systole, and forces blood out of the ventricles into the pulmonary artery and the aorta. Between contractions the heart relaxes and fills with blood. This relaxation stage is called diastole. One cycle of systole and diastole makes up a single heartbeat, which lasts about 0.8 seconds in humans. This is known as the cardiac cycle (see fig D). You will learn more about how the rate of the heartbeat is controlled in Book 2 Topic 7.



semilunar valves closed








Diastole – the heart is relaxed and fills with blood.

atrioventricular valves open







semilunar valves open







Systole – the heart (atria followed by ventricles) contracts and forces blood out to the lungs and around the body.
? fig D The cardiac cycle

atrioventricular valves closed
















 cardiovascular diseases  communicable (infectious)
diseases, childbirth and
nutritional conditions
 injuries
 all other causes
? fig A This WHO data from 2017 shows cardiovascular disease is the biggest single cause of death around the world.

CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES
Problems with the cardiovascular system have serious consequences. Globally, almost 18 million people die from cardiovascular diseases each year. World Health Organization (WHO) data from 2017 show that cardiovascular diseases were responsible for 31% of all global deaths – it is the single biggest cause of death and disability (see fig A). What is more, around a third of these deaths were in people younger than 70.
Many cardiovascular diseases are linked to a condition called atherosclerosis.
ATHEROSCLEROSIS
Atherosclerosis, a hardening of the arteries, is a disease in which plaques (made of a yellowish fatty substance) build up on the inside of arteries. It can begin in late childhood and continues throughout life. A plaque can continue to develop until it restricts the flow of blood through the artery or even blocks it completely. Plaques are most likely to form in the arteries of the heart (coronary arteries) and neck (carotid arteries). The typical development of a plaque is summarised in fig B.
artery walls


smooth normal endothelium

Slight damage to the endothelial cells lining the artery leads to an inflammatory response, followed by a build-up of cholesterol.








The fatty deposits grow to form an atheroma.









Fibrous tissue and calcium salts build up around the atheroma forming a hardened plaque which narrows the artery and makes the walls rigid.
? fig B The development of atherosclerosis
We can now look at this development in more detail. Atherosclerosis begins with damage to the endothelial lining of blood vessels. This damage can be caused by several factors, including high blood pressure and substances in tobacco smoke. Atherosclerosis usually occurs in arteries rather than in veins. This is because the blood in the arteries flows fast under relatively high pressure, which puts more strain on the endothelial lining of the vessels and can cause small areas of damage. In the veins, the pressure is lower so damage to the endothelium is much less likely.




Once damage to the endothelium has occurred, the body’s inflammatory response begins and white blood cells arrive at the site of the damage. These cells accumulate chemicals from the blood, especially cholesterol. This leads to a plaque (also known as an atheroma) forming on the endothelial lining of the artery (see fig C). Fibrous tissue and calcium salts also build up (increase in amount) around the atheroma, turning it into a hardened plaque. This hardened area means that part of the artery wall is less elastic and narrower than it should be. This is atherosclerosis and is summarised in fig B.
The plaque causes the lumen of the artery to become much smaller. This increases the blood pressure, making it harder for the heart to pump blood around the body. The raised blood pressure makes damage more likely in other areas of the endothelial lining and more plaques will form.
This will make the blood pressure even higher, and so the problem gets worse. There are many factors that are linked to the development of atherosclerosis. You will look at these in more detail in Chapter 1C.
EFFECT OF ATHEROSCLEROSIS ON HEALTH
Atherosclerosis can have many serious effects on the health of an individual. The development
of atherosclerosis can be summarised as: damage to the endothelium of the arteries ? inflammatory response ? accumulation of cholesterol ? atheroma ? fibrous tissue/calcium salts ? plaque ? narrowing/loss of elasticity of the artery.
ANEURYSMS
If an area of an artery is narrowed by plaque, blood tends to collect behind the blockage. The artery bulges and the wall is put under more pressure than usual, so it becomes weakened. This is known as an aneurysm. The weakened artery wall may split open, leading to massive internal bleeding.
Aneurysms frequently happen in the blood vessels supplying the brain or in the aorta, especially when it passes through the abdomen. The massive blood loss and drop in blood pressure are often fatal, but if aneurysms are diagnosed they can be treated by surgery before they burst.
RAISED BLOOD PRESSURE
The arteries narrowed due to plaques on the walls cause raised blood pressure. This can lead to severe damage in a number of organs, including the kidneys, the eyes and the brain. The high pressure damages the tiny blood vessels where your kidney filters out urea and other substances from the blood. If the vessels feeding the kidney tubules become narrowed, the pressure inside them gets even higher and proteins may be forced out through their walls. If you have high blood pressure, your doctors can test for protein in your urine as a sign of kidney damage.
Similarly, the tiny blood vessels supplying the retina of your eye are easily damaged. If they become blocked or leak, the retinal cells are starved of oxygen and die and this can cause blindness.
Bleeding from the capillaries into the brain results in one type of stroke (see below).
HEART DISEASE
There are many kinds of heart disease, but the two most common ones are angina and myocardial infarction (heart attack); both are closely linked to atherosclerosis (see figs B and D).
In angina, plaques build up slowly in the coronary arteries, reducing blood flow to the parts of the heart muscle beyond the plaques. Often symptoms are first noticed during exercise, when the cardiac muscle is working harder and needs more oxygen. The narrowed coronary arteries cannot supply enough oxygenated blood and the heart muscle resorts to anaerobic respiration. This causes a gripping pain in the chest that can extend into the arms, particularly the left one, and the jaw, and often also causes breathlessness. The symptoms of angina subside once exercise stops, but the experience is painful and frightening.
Fortunately, most angina is relatively mild. It can be helped by taking regular exercise, losing weight and not smoking. The symptoms can be treated by drugs that cause rapid dilation of the coronary blood vessels so that they supply the cardiac muscle with the oxygen it needs. However, if the blockage of the coronary arteries continues to get worse, so will the symptoms of the angina. Other drugs are then used to dilate the blood vessels and reduce the heart rate. Unfortunately, drugs cannot



? fig C Fatty deposits like these in an artery cause disease and death in millions of people every year.










solve a severe problem permanently. A small tube called a stent may be inserted into the coronary arteries to hold them open, or heart bypass surgery may be carried out.

narrowed artery




largest heart attack (cardiac arrest) follows if blockage is at C









C

BB


A



? fig D Injecting the blood vessels with special dye allows doctors to see where the coronary arteries are narrowing due to atherosclerosis so they can treat the problem.



small heart attack – death of small amount of heart tissue if blockage is at A


medium heart attack – death of some heart tissue if blockage is at B









Many heart attacks are caused by a blood clot resulting from atherosclerosis. As you have seen, the wall of an artery affected by a plaque is stiffened, making it much more likely to suffer cracks or damage. Platelets touch the damaged surface of the plaque and the clotting process is triggered (see Section 1B.2). The plaque itself may rupture and break open, and the cholesterol that is released will also cause the platelets to trigger the blood clotting process. A clot may also develop because the endothelial lining is damaged, for example by high blood pressure or smoking.
A clot that forms in a blood vessel is known as a thrombosis. The clot can rapidly block the whole blood vessel, particularly if it is already narrowed by a plaque. A clot that gets stuck in a coronary artery is known as a coronary thrombosis. The clot
can block the artery, starving the heart muscle beyond that point of oxygen and nutrients, and this often leads to a heart attack (see fig E).

? fig E The size and severity of a heart attack is closely related to the position of the blockage in the coronary artery.
During a heart attack, there is chest pain in the same areas as in an angina attack, but it is much more severe. The pain may occur at any time, although exercise may start it, and it often lasts for several hours. Death may occur very rapidly with no previous symptoms, or it may happen after several days of feeling tired and suffering symptoms mistaken for indigestion.
It is very important to react quickly if you suspect someone is having a heart attack. Give them two full-strength aspirin tablets to help stop the blood clotting, and get them to hospital as fast as you can.
STROKES
A stroke is caused by an interruption to the normal blood supply to an area of the brain. This may be due to bleeding from damaged capillaries or a blockage cutting off the blood supply to the brain. A blockage is usually caused by a blood clot, an atheroma or a combination of the two. Sometimes, the blood clot forms somewhere else in the body and is carried in the bloodstream until it gets stuck in an artery in the brain. The damage happens very quickly. A blockage in one of the main
arteries leading to the brain causes a very serious stroke that may lead to death. In one of the smaller arterioles leading into the brain, the effects may be less disastrous.
The symptoms of strokes vary, depending on how much of the brain is affected. Very often, the blood is cut off from one part or one side of the brain only (see fig F). Symptoms include dizziness, confusion, slurred speech, blurred vision or partial loss of vision (usually one eye) and numbness. In more severe strokes, there can be paralysis, usually on one side of the body.




? fig F The damage caused in the brain by a major stroke resulting from a blood clot in the wrong place can be seen on the left of this MRI scan. The healthy part of the brain is shown in blue.
The outcome of either a heart attack or a stroke usually depends on how soon the person is treated. The sooner the patient is given treatment, including clot-busting drugs that break down or dissolve the blood clot, the more likely they are to survive. For example,
if treatment is given rapidly, 75% of patients who survive the first week after a heart attack can expect to be alive five years later.












1 (a) Which statement is incorrect?
A All arteries carry oxygenated blood.
B All veins carry blood at low pressure.
C All veins carry blood towards the heart.
D All arteries carry blood away from the heart.	[1]
(b) Draw a labelled diagram to show the structure of an artery wall.	[3]
(c) Explain how the structure of an artery wall relates to
its function.	[2]
(d) Give two differences between the structure of a vein
and the structure of a capillary.	[2]
(Total for Question 1 = 8 marks)

2 Many animals have hearts that pump blood through a network of blood vessels.
(a) What is the correct term for the circulation of a mammal?
A closed single circulation
B open single circulation
C closed double circulation
D open double circulation	[1]
(b) The table below refers to blood flow in the four major blood vessels of the human heart. If the statement is correct, place a tick (?) in the appropriate box and if
the statement is incorrect, place a cross (?) in the
appropriate box.








[4]
(c) The diagram below shows a section through the heart of a mammal.
(d) 
Heart muscle has a high demand for oxygen. Describe
how heart muscle is supplied with oxygen.	[3]
(e) The volume of blood pumped by the ventricles is
0.07 dm3. Calculate the cardiac output when the heart
rate is 72 bpm.	[2]
(Total for Question 2 = 12 marks)
3 (a) The diagram below shows a mammalian heart during atrial systole.












What evidence can be seen in the diagram to confirm it is in atrial systole?
A Both the semilunar valves and the atrioventricular valves are open.
B Both the semilunar valves and the atrioventricular valves are closed.
C The semilunar valves are open and the atrioventricular valves are closed.
D The semilunar valves are closed and the atrioventricular valves are open.	[1]
(b) Humans and fish are both animals that have a heart and a network of blood vessels. However, there are some differences in their circulatory systems. The diagrams below illustrate a human circulatory system and a fish circulatory system.
Human circulatory system	Fish circulatory system

Name the parts labelled A and B.	[2]

heart

heart



A


body






lungs




body


gills

The arrows show the direction of blood flow.
B
(i) Describe the circulation of blood in a fish using the
information in the diagram.	[3]





(ii) Using the information in both diagrams, evaluate the advantages that the human circulatory system has compared with that of the fish.	[2]
(c) Describe the cardiac cycle.	[5]
(Total for Question 3 = 11 marks)
4 (a) The graph below shows oxygen dissociation curves for human myoglobin and human haemoglobin.

100
(b) 
Describe and explain the function of the semilunar
valves.	[3]
(c) Explain the function of the tendinous cords in the atrioventricular valves.	[2]
(Total for Question 5 = 9 marks)
6 (a) Platelets are fragments of cells that are involved in blood clotting. Describe how blood clots.	[4]
(b) Describe two conditions that are caused by blood clots that form inside the blood vessels.	[4]

90	myoglobin
80
70
60
50
40


haemoglobin
(c) 
State the meaning of the term aneurysm and explain how an aneurysm is caused.	[3]
(Total for Question 6 = 11 marks)
7 (a) The diagram below shows how most carbon dioxide is transported.

30	CO

CO + H O

2	2	2
20	E
10	S
0

0	2	4	6

8	10

I	HCO

Partial pressure of oxygen/kPa
(i) Using the graph, state the partial pressures of oxygen at which myoglobin and haemoglobin are 50% saturated with oxygen.	[2]
(ii) Calculate the increase in percentage saturation for haemoglobin between 2 kPa of oxygen and 8 kPa of oxygen. Show your working.	[2]
(b) The muscle of diving mammals such as elephant seals contains a lot of myoglobin. Use the information in the graph to explain how the myoglobin can help an elephant seal to dive for longer.	[3]
(c) At increased partial pressures of carbon dioxide, the oxygen dissociation curve for haemoglobin moves to the right. This is known as the Bohr effect.
Explain the importance of the Bohr effect.	[4]
(Total for Question 4 = 11 marks)
5 (a) During a dissection of a mammalian heart a student measured the thickness of the ventricular walls. The left ventricle wall was 32 mm thick and the right wall was 11 mm thick.
(i) Calculate the thickness of the right ventricle wall as a percentage of the left ventricle wall thickness.
Show your working and state your answer to three significant figures.	[2]
(ii) Explain the difference in the thickness of the
ventricle walls.	[2]

3

(i) What is the name of the cell represented by
the circle.	[1]
A leucocyte
B neutrophil
C erythrocyte
D stem cell
(ii) What is the name of enzyme E.	[1]
A catalase
B carbonase
C anhydrous carbonase
D carbonic anhydrase
(iii) Name substance S.	[1]
(iv) Identify ion I.	[1]
(b) If ion I is allowed to accumulate inside the cell it could affect the functioning of the cell.
(i) Describe how the accumulation of ion I is prevented.
[2]
(ii) Explain the effect that accumulation of ion I has on the transport of oxygen.	[2]
(Total for Question 7 = 8 marks)

TOPIC 1 MOLECULES,
TRANSPORT AND HEALTH
CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH AND RISK
What do you do with your spare time? Do you like to watch TV, read, use the internet or spend time on social media? According to a recent poll of professionals in the Middle East and North Africa, a third of people spend more than five hours a day using the internet for leisure. One fifth of people spend at least one hour a day relaxing online. Compare that to only 4.6% who prefer to play sport and only 2.2% who prefer outdoor pursuits. Over 35% of people eat out nearly every day. People enjoy an affluent lifestyle – eating well, using a car instead of walking, relaxing at home or spending time with family and friends. Unfortunately, many people do not realise that these are also risk factors that increase the probability that they will develop a serious disease of the heart or blood vessels.
In this topic, you will learn about the meaning of risk and how we perceive risk. Cardiovascular diseases are those of the heart and blood vessels. You will learn how we can determine what causes cardiovascular diseases and what increases the chances of us developing such diseases. Diet is an important factor and the things we choose to eat can increase the risk of developing these life-threatening diseases. Fortunately, making the right choices can also significantly decrease the risks. You will learn how scientists and health professionals can use evidence to analyse the risks and how these diseases can be treated.
MATHS SKILLS FOR THIS CHAPTER
• Recognise and make use of appropriate units in calculations (e.g. calculating a BMI in kg m–2)
• Recognise and use expressions in decimal and standard form (e.g. calculating a person’s BMI)
• Use ratios, fractions and percentages (e.g. calculating proportions of the population with certain risk factors)
• Construct and interpret frequency tables and diagrams, bar charts and histograms (e.g. interpreting data about incidence of disease or the effect of reducing risk factors)
• Understand simple probability (e.g. considering the chances of developing a particular cardiovascular disease)
• Use a scatter diagram to identify a correlation between two variables (e.g. comparing risk of developing a disease with risk factors such as diet or blood pressure)
• Translate information between graphical, numerical and algebraic forms (e.g. draw graphs from data tables or select data from graphs about various risk factors)
• Calculate rate of change from a graph showing a linear relationship (e.g. calculate how quickly the proportion of people who are obese has increased over the last 50 years)















What prior knowledge do I need?
Chapter 1B
• Components of a healthy diet
• Structure of the circulatory system
• Structure of blood vessels

What will I study in this chapter?
• The meaning of risk, correlation and cause
• The causes of cardiovascular disease
• The risk factors that contribute to developing cardiovascular disease
• The effect of diet on cardiovascular health
• How scientists and health professionals use data as evidence about risk factors
• How we can reduce the risk of developing cardiovascular disease
• How cardiovascular diseases can be treated





What will I study later?
Chapter 2C
• Genetic screening for risk factors Chapter 3C
• Potential for using stem cells in treatment Topic 6 (Book 2: IAL)
• The immune response Topic 7 (Book 2: IAL)
• Control of the cardiovascular system























? fig A The risk, chance or probability that you will pick a blue ball out of the black bag is 1 in 6. If you return the ball to the bag each time, you will have exactly the same probability of picking a blue ball again the next time. The probability will always be 1 in 6.

Every country has diseases which affect its people and may even kill them. Some of these diseases affect you randomly – there is nothing you can do to change whether you are affected or not. However, for many diseases, especially non-communicable (non-infectious) conditions such as heart disease and cancer, you can increase or lower your risk of becoming ill, based on factors in your lifestyle. If you understand the risk factors, you can help to make yourself and your family healthier.

WHAT IS RISK?
The word risk is used regularly in everyday conversation, but in science it has a very specific meaning. In science, risk describes the probability that an event will happen. Probability means the chance or likelihood of the event, calculated mathematically. For example, imagine you have six coloured balls – red, blue, green, yellow, orange and purple – in a black cloth bag (see fig A). If you reach in and pull out a single ball, the probability (risk) of getting, say, a green ball can be expressed in one of three ways:
• 1 in 6
• 0.166 66 recurring (0.17)
• 17%.
This is the case for any one of the six colours in the bag. In the same way, it is possible to work out your risk of developing certain specified diseases or of dying from a specified cause.
HOW DO WE PERCEIVE RISK?
The actual risk of doing something is not always the same as the sense of risk one feels. Most people don’t think twice before getting into their car – but globally you have an annual risk of 1 in 5747 of being killed in a road traffic accident. On the other hand, many people get very worried before flying, but commercial flights have a 1 in 4.5–5.5 million risk of crashing. Personal perception of risk is based on a variety of factors which include:
• how familiar you are with the activity
• how much you enjoy the activity
• whether or not you approve of the activity.
The actual mathematical risk may play very little part in developing your personal perception of risk. People often overestimate the benefits, or minimise the risk, of behaviour that they want to continue. For example, there is now strong evidence from around the world that obesity is linked to a range of diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease and some cancers. However, people like eating and so they still become overweight. On the other hand, they will over-emphasise the risks of activities
if they want to avoid them or prevent others from doing them. For example, parents over-emphasise the risk of wandering away to small children, to help make the child behave and stay close.
In another example, there is good scientific evidence that smoking affects our risk of developing diseases such as atherosclerosis, as well as lung cancer. However, knowledge of the mathematical risk of an early death if you smoke cigarettes doesn’t always stop people from smoking.




EPIDEMIOLOGY
If you know the number of people in a population who are affected by a disease, it is possible to calculate the average risk of developing that disease for a person within that population. But the risk is higher for some people than others, depending on their lifestyle and which genes they inherit.
It is possible to identify the risk factors that may contribute to the cause of a disease. You can look at people who have the same factors (e.g. smoking) and compare their risk of the disease with the average risk for the whole population. Using these techniques, it appears that there are a number of factors that increase the likelihood that a person will develop atherosclerosis. If many factors influence your chance of having a disease, it is called a multifactorial disease. The study of the patterns of diseases and their causes is called epidemiology.
When two different sets of data change together, there may be a link, which is called a correlation. For example, mortality data from a disease such as atherosclerosis may change in a similar pattern to a lifestyle factor such as smoking or lack of exercise. However, this does not prove that one is the cause of the other. They could both be caused by something else which would explain why they change in the same way. Correlation is not
the same as causation – further research is always needed to demonstrate a causal link.
For example, fig B shows the percentage of deaths in the UAE from cardiovascular disease each year. It also shows the
statistics for obesity and diabetes. This data suggests a possible correlation between obesity and heart disease.
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

You cannot base conclusions on a single set of data. However, these UAE data agree with findings from countries around the world that suggest obesity is closely linked to the development of diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. Dr Raghib Ali, principle investigator in the UAE Healthy Future Study, has set up a long- term study in Abu Dhabi. The team is aiming to collect the data needed to confirm the pattern of increased disease risk in the UAE – and so to find ways of reducing the risk of diabetes and cardiovascular diseases.





Deaths from CVD

Obese

Overweight	Diabetes

? fig B This data shows a possible correlation between obesity, diabetes and death from cardiovascular disease (CVD). It needs more data from other sources to show that obesity can cause diabetes and CVD.




2 INVESTIGATING THE CAUSES OF CVDs


SPECIFICATION REFERENCE
 1.12   1.16 






Everywhere you look, on television, in newspapers and on the internet, there are reports of factors which affect your health. Eat fruit and vegetables, drink orange juice, take lots of exercise, enjoy these foods – how do we know which advice is based on good science, and which is given to us because someone wants to sell us something? There are many ways in which you can evaluate the design of studies to decide if the data are meaningful.
DESIGNING STUDIES
Most epidemiological studies are based on a very big sample size – usually, the bigger the study, the more meaningful the results.
The ideal is to investigate one factor or variable, keeping all other variables the same (controlled). However, controlling variables
is almost impossible when you are working with human beings. The way people live is complex and varies a lot, so it is hard to detect how any one factor affects people. When a larger number of people are studied, it is more likely that patterns may emerge, even with all the other differences between the people involved. Evidence based on large amounts of data is more likely to be statistically significant than evidence based on small studies.
Some epidemiological studies are carried out over a long time. These longitudinal studies are very valuable because they follow the same group of individuals over many years (see fig A). This means the impact of their known lifestyle on their health can be tracked over time. For example, the Münster Heart Study looked at cardiovascular disease in 10 856 men aged 36–65 in Europe, following them from the start of the study well into the
21st century. The results from this study are still seen as important because so many people were involved over a long period of time. The Framingham Study in the US also provided much data – but was limited because they were all from similar American citizens. The study started in 1948 and it is still going on – the scientists have widened the population they gather data from, so it is more relevant now.
An ambitious new study called the National Children’s Study has been set up in the US to follow 100 000 children from birth until they are 21 years old. From 2008–2012, children were selected to be representative of the whole of the US population. One major objective of the study is to examine how environmental inputs and genetic factors interact to affect the health and development of children. This is believed to be the biggest longitudinal study ever set up. Similarly, the UAE Healthy Future Study will be longitudinal, looking at the same group of volunteers over a number of years.
Sometimes, scientists look at all the available studies in a subject area and analyse the available data in a massive literature study. This combines small and large studies and can give more reliable

evidence than any one of the studies alone. This is called a
metadata analysis (meta-analysis).
EVALUATING SCIENTIFIC STUDIES
When considering a study, you need to examine the methodology to see if it is valid. That means that it is properly designed to answer the question or questions being asked. You also need to see if the measurements have been carried out with precision. It is important to find out if other scientists have been able to repeat the methodology and have had similar results – if so, the results are considered more reliable.
It is also important to know who carried out the research, who funded it and where it was published. Then to decide whether or not any of these factors might have affected or biased the study. You need to evaluate the data and conclusions from the study in the light of all these factors.

In the next few pages, you are going to look at some of the evidence that scientists have collected suggesting factors that may – or may not – affect your risk of developing cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). In each case, you need to look carefully at the type of evidence that is presented and think about what else you need to know to make firm conclusions.
RISK FACTORS FOR CVDs
The results from many epidemiological studies have identified a range of risk factors linked to CVDs. These factors divide into
two main groups – those you can’t change and those you can do something about (see Section 1C.3).
NON-MODIFIABLE RISK FACTORS FOR ATHEROSCLEROSIS
There are three main risk factors for CVDs which cannot (at the present time) be changed.
• Genes: studies show that there is a genetic tendency (trend) in some families, and also in some ethnic groups, to develop CVDs. These trends can include
– arteries which are easily damaged




– a tendency to develop hypertension which can cause arterial damage and make CVDs more likely
– problems with the cholesterol balance of the body.
• Age: as you get older, your blood vessels begin to lose their elasticity and to narrow slightly. This can make you more likely to suffer from CVDs, particularly heart disease.
• Gender: statistically, under the age of 50, men are more likely to suffer from heart disease (and other CVDs) than women. The female hormone oestrogen, which is an important factor in the woman’s menstrual cycle, appears to reduce the build-up of plaque. This gives women some protection against CVDs until they go through the menopause when oestrogen levels fall.


LOOKING AT THE DATA
Identical twin studies are an excellent resource when investigating whether there is a genetic factor at work, because identical twins have exactly the same genes. Any differences should therefore be due to the environment in which they live. A major twin study was conducted in Sweden and was based on over 21 000 pairs of twins, both identical and non-identical. This study showed that (for male twins) if one twin died of heart disease between the ages of 36 and 55, then the risk of the other twin also dying of heart disease was eight times higher than if neither was affected (see fig A). However, as the twins got older, one dying of heart disease had less of a correlation with the other twin also dying of heart disease. In other words, there appears to be a clear genetic link to heart disease in

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%



100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%



36–55	56–65	66–75	76–85	85+
Age (years)






Heritability is the tendency for heart disease to be inherited. Follow-up time is the year of follow-up after the original study carried out in 1961.


1987	1992	1996
Follow-up time

younger men, but it gets less in much older men.
Epidemiological studies have also identified several lifestyle factors linked to CVDs, some of which you will look at in the following pages. These lifestyle factors are important for health because they are the factors that we can change.

? fig A These are results from an epidemiological study of male twins in Sweden published in 1994. Although this study was carried out a long time ago, the findings are still important, because of the large number of twin pairs who took part and the length of the study.






1C	3 RISK FACTORS FOR CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE


SPECIFICATION REFERENCE
 1.12   1.16 















160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

The non-modifiable factors affecting your risk of developing CVDs – age, genetics and gender – are the same all over the world. However, the numbers of people who die of CVDs varies enormously, depending on where you live, as you can see in fig A. This tells us that other factors are involved
– factors which vary with your lifestyle. In the rest of this topic, you will find out more about the lifestyle factors which affect us and influence our risk of developing – or dying from – heart disease.
158
 heart attack stroke

Low income countries
  
Low/middle income countries
  
High/middle income countries

High income countries

? fig A Deaths from CVDs in different countries (based on 2012 data)

MODIFIABLE (LIFESTYLE) RISK FACTORS FOR CVDs
The development of atherosclerosis is linked to many types of CVD. Your lifestyle can affect your risk of developing atherosclerosis in the future. Epidemiological studies have shown links with smoking, diet and weight, lack of activity and high blood pressure. These are the factors we can change, so we can change our risk of developing CVDs by the lifestyle choices we make.
SMOKING AND ATHEROSCLEROSIS
Studies have shown that smokers are far more likely to develop atherosclerosis than non-smokers with a similar lifestyle. Nine out of ten people who need heart bypass surgery or stents as a result of atherosclerosis are smokers. In 2007, a Spanish study showed a clear correlation between smoking and the incidence of death from atherosclerotic heart disease. Causation was established by further research. For example, studies found that the substances in tobacco smoke:
• can damage the artery linings, which makes the build-up of plaques more likely
• can cause the arteries to narrow, raise the blood pressure and increase the risk of atherosclerosis. Similar findings were made in a study on adults with heart disease in Jordan in 2017 (see fig B).




Smoking 2	Smoking 1
10	10
8	8
6	6
4	4
2	2
0	0



male female

<45	45–54

55–64	651

<45	45–54

55–64	651

Age (years)	Age (years)
? fig B Proportion of adults with coronary artery disease (CAD) depending on whether they smoke or not based on a Jordanian study in 2017.
INACTIVITY AND CVDs
Regular exercise helps lower blood pressure, prevent obesity and diabetes, lower blood cholesterol levels, balance lipoproteins and reduce stress. These also lower your risk of developing atherosclerosis and CVDs. A study of 10 269 male Harvard University (USA) graduates aged between 45 and 84 showed that the men who changed from being inactive to taking regular exercise had a 23% lower mortality over the life of the study than those who did not exercise. Moreover, the main cause of the deaths was atherosclerosis and the linked CVDs. A study of 72 488 female nurses showed the same benefits for women – the more active women had a significantly lower risk of developing atherosclerosis and other CVDs.
A 2013 study from Sri Lanka showed a similar pattern – high levels of inactivity were linked to an increased risk of obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure and CVDs. High levels of activity were linked to a reduced risk of all these conditions. Several studies have shown that exercise both reduces the formation of plaques in the arteries and also keeps plaques that are present more stable and less likely to break.
HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE AND ATHEROSCLEROSIS
As you saw in Section 1B.4, the heart pumps blood out into your arteries in a regular rhythm. The blood travels through your arterial system at pressures which change as your heart beats and which are easily measured (see fig C). At systole, when the blood is forced out of the heart, a healthy blood pressure is around 120 mmHg. When the heart is relaxed and filling during diastole, a healthy blood pressure is around 80 mmHg. Measuring blood pressure is used as an indicator of the health of both your heart and your blood vessels. Your blood pressure goes up and down naturally during the day
– but it shouldn’t be constantly raised. If your blood pressure is regularly above 140/90 mmHg, you have high blood pressure or hypertension. Raised blood pressure can be a sign of atherosclerosis. The blood pressure goes up when the walls of the arteries become less flexible due to the build-
up of plaque, and when the lumen of the arteries get narrower as they are blocked by the plaques. This means that raised blood pressure can be the result of atherosclerosis and can be used to help diagnose the disease.

? fig C Doctors can use a blood pressure monitor like this to check that your blood pressure is in the healthy range. Some people buy and use their own monitor, so they can check their blood pressure regularly to help prevent them getting CVDs.




However, other factors can also raise the blood pressure. For example, smoking narrows the blood vessels and raises the blood pressure. Obesity, inactivity, a high level of salt in the diet and stress can also narrow the arteries or affect the way the heart is pumping and raise the blood pressure. When the blood pressure is constantly high, the lining of the arteries is more likely to be damaged, leading to atherosclerosis and ultimately CVDs. So high blood pressure can also contribute to CVDs. If a doctor discovers you have high blood pressure, they will try to help you reduce
the level by making lifestyle changes or with medication, to try to reduce your risk of developing CVDs.
DIET, OBESITY AND ATHEROSCLEROSIS
An increasing number of studies suggest that being overweight does not directly affect your risk of developing CVDs, but it is a very important indicator of risk. Most scientists think that the best predictors of future CVDs are:
• where fat is stored on your body
• how much exercise you do
• the levels of different fats in your blood.
Two other factors which are often a direct result of being overweight do increase the risk of atherosclerosis and CVDs. These are:
• high blood pressure – increases the risk of damage to blood vessel linings, and so of plaque formation
• type 2 diabetes – this can result in damage to the lining of the blood vessels which increases the risk of plaque formation.
There have been many studies on how diet is linked to atherosclerosis and CVDs, some looking at general diet, some looking at the role of diet in becoming overweight or obese, and some looking at specific foods. The evidence is very mixed and very difficult to interpret. You can find out more about this in Section 1C.4.

PREVENTING ATHEROSCLEROSIS AND CVDs
The advice about what is ‘good’ for us and what is ‘bad’ changes. This happens because epidemiological studies of links between risk factors and CVDs become more sophisticated and scientific research discovers more reasons why some factors can contribute to atherosclerosis. Current evidence suggests that eating a balanced diet with a variety of fats and plenty of fruit and vegetables helps prevent atherosclerosis. It helps not to smoke, to maintain a healthy weight to avoid high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes, to reduce constant stress and get plenty of exercise. It is important to take action as early as possible because there is clear evidence of the early signs of atherosclerosis in teenagers and even young children, if known risk factors are already in place.


	
LINKS BETWEEN FACTORS
Many epidemiological studies are starting to find that an increased risk of developing a disease is often due to a combination of factors. For example, it is known that smoking increases your risk of atherosclerosis because of its effect on your blood vessels and blood pressure. Evidence now suggests that smoking also changes the balance of lipoproteins in your blood in a way which raises your risk of dying from atherosclerosis-related CVDs. You will find out more about lipoproteins and their effect on cardiovascular risk in Section 1C.4.



4 DIET AND CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH


SPECIFICATION REFERENCE
 1.12   1.18(i)   1.18(ii) 




There is strong evidence from around the world that the food we eat has a big effect on our health in many different ways. It certainly has a big impact on the health of our cardiovascular system. However, our understanding of what the effect is and how our food affects our risk of developing cardiovascular diseases keeps changing as scientists learn more.

WEIGHT ISSUES
There is plenty of food in the developed world and people can easily eat more than they need to supply the metabolic needs of the body. This means that many people have a positive energy
balance. The excess food energy is converted into a store of fat so these people become overweight and then obese. All the evidence suggests that being obese increases your risk of developing many different diseases, including CVDs.

MEASURING A HEALTHY WEIGHT:
THE BODY MASS INDEX
What do we mean by ‘overweight’? It isn’t just how much you weigh. Doctors and scientists look at your body mass index (BMI) to decide if you are unhealthily heavy (see fig A). This compares your weight to your height in a simple formula:
      weight in kilograms BMI = (height in metres)2
For an adult, the following definitions apply:
• a BMI of less than 18.5 kg m–2 means you are underweight
• a BMI of 18.5–25 kg m–2 is the ideal range
• a BMI over 25 and up to 30 kg m–2 means you are overweight
• a BMI of 30–40 kg m–2 is considered obese
• a BMI over 40 kg m–2 defines you as morbidly obese.






6’6
6’5
6’4
6’3
6’2
6’1
6’0
5’11
5’10
5’9
5’8
5’7
5’6
5’5
5’4
5’3
5’2
5’1
5’0
4’11
4’10


Your weight in kilos
40	50	60	70	80	90	100  110  120  130  140  150






1.98
1.96
1.94
1.92
1.90
1.88
1.86
1.84
1.82
1.80
1.78
1.76
1.74
1.72
1.70
1.68
1.66
1.64
1.62
1.60
1.58
1.56
1.54
1.52
1.50
1.48

6  7  8  9  10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Your weight in stones
? fig A Using a graph like this gives an adult a good idea of whether or not their BMI is in the healthy range.




The BMI measure was developed in the mid-1800s and it was originally used to classify normal, relatively inactive people of average body composition. The normal charts apply to adults only – there are special charts for children and teenagers. Young people grow and their body composition changes as they mature, so both age and gender are important in calculating what is normal until they become adults. The BMI became widely used for deciding whether people are a healthy weight for their height and even for predicting the likelihood of CVDs – but doctors increasingly feel
it is a very limited tool. Most top athletes would have BMIs in the obese range, because BMI makes no allowance for the difference in composition of people’s bodies. The reason athletes often have BMIs that suggest they are obese is because BMI does not recognise the difference between fat and muscle. BMI values also
underestimate body fat in older people who have lost a lot of their muscle mass. There are also international differences, with some groups having a greater or lower than average risk of obesity- related diseases. More and more, the evidence suggests that BMI is not a good predictor of CVDs on its own – but combined with other factors it is part of the picture (see fig B).
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

lower the waist : hip ratio. These include eating less and taking more exercise to reduce the fat stores and reduce the size of the waist.
Keeping the waist : hip ratio at a healthy level reduces your overall risk of CVDs, as well as the many other conditions linked to obesity.
Being seriously underweight is not good for you either and can lead to muscle wasting, heart damage and other health problems. However, it is the other end of the scale that is causing the most concern. The available data show that around 61% of all adults in England (that’s almost 24 million people) are either overweight or obese, and that the proportion of the population affected is continuing to rise. The trend towards obesity is being seen across the developed world. For example, Gulf Cooperation Council countries face challenges with health problems related to obesity. Saudi Arabia (35.2%), Qatar (33.1%) and UAE (33%) face similar concerns.
TACKLING OBESITY
Evidence from around the world suggests that the change in energy balance is linked to modern lifestyles rather than simply to poor individual choices. Energy-rich food is widely available and cheap. The 21st century way of life in many countries involves almost no exercise – relatively few jobs now require manual labour, household tasks are often automated and people drive instead of walking or cycling. So, as the average energy input has increased (or stayed the same), the energy output has decreased and people are gaining weight. Solutions include taxes on fatty foods, town planning to make walking and cycling easier and educating children to prevent childhood obesity – but there is no clear scientific evidence that any of these solutions work. One thing we do know – since 2006, the number of overweight people in the world is greater than the number of people who do not get

lean
<16.7%
  
normal 16.7–24.9%

obese
>25%

enough to eat. The importance of reducing obesity is shown in the graph in fig C. This also shows that waist : hip ratio is a better

Body fat category (% weight as fat)
? fig B The risk of dying of CVDs differs for people in different weight and fitness categories. Being overweight or obese does increase the risk – but it is not the whole story.
MEASURING A HEALTHY WEIGHT: THE WAIST-TO-HIP RATIO
Increasingly, scientists are finding that a simple waist : hip ratio is the best measure of obesity, and also the best way to predict
an increased risk of CVDs. The waist is measured just above the navel, and the hips at the widest point of the hips. The size of the waist is then divided by the size of the hips:

predictor of heart disease than BMI.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4



waist-to-hip ratio
BMI

waist size (cm)

low	medium

high	highest



hip size (cm)
Waist size gives a good indication of the amount of fat a person is carrying.




A simple measurement like this can be used easily by individuals to monitor their own health and well-being. Simple measures can

Quartile
? fig C This graph shows that as men become more obese, their risk of developing coronary heart disease also increases. It also shows that waist : hip ratio is a better predictor than BMI.
DIET AND CVDs
The effect of diet on the risk of developing CVDs isn’t simply about becoming obese. What you eat, as well as how much you eat, seems to be very important. Many studies have looked at the general diet people eat and at the incidence of heart disease. For example, one study produced the graph in fig D. This shows that



in countries where people eat a lot of fatty meat and dairy foods (mostly saturated fats), many people die of heart disease. This suggests that high levels of saturated fats in the diet may be a risk factor.
500






400



* name at time of study

Sweden UK




Norway







USA





  Germany Finland
  
Ireland Austria




Denmark


Belgium



300





200








Zimbabwe






South Africa












  Portugal Trinidad
Spain	Cuba





 Bulgaria Yugoslavia*
Uruguay



Greece

Czechoslovakia*

Australia
Italy

Poland



Argentina
   
Switzerland Netherlands
New Zealand


France


100





0

Egypt
       Philippines Sri Lanka
Peru

Mozambique



Japan Paraguay
Ecuador
Bolivia



Singapore




Hong Kong	Bahamas

0	40	60	80	100	120
Animal fat grams/person per day
? fig D Data from the early 21st century showing the death rates per 1000 men and women from heart attacks in different countries compared with the average intake of animal (saturated) fats.
The link between a diet high in saturated fats and a raised incidence of CVDs shows a correlation, but not a cause. Over the last 50 years or so, many scientific studies showed that a high intake of saturated fats was often associated with high blood cholesterol levels. Cholesterol is involved in plaque formation in atherosclerosis, so this suggested a cause for the link between a high-fat diet and CVDs (see fig E).
40	14


30	12

20	10


10	8


0	6


Serum cholesterol (mmol/dm3)
? fig E The relationship between blood cholesterol levels and death from coronary heart disease (CHD) in men in the UK. The bars show the frequency with which the different cholesterol concentrations are found, while the line graph shows the number of heart attacks per 1000 men each year.


Then, in 2014, a major study was published by scientists from prestigious institutions including the universities of Cambridge, Oxford and Bristol, Imperial College and the Medical Research Council in the UK. The results suggested that the links found between diets high in saturated fats and atherosclerosis and CVDs had been a correlation and nothing more. Looking at all of the data from 72 studies they found that diets high in saturated fats did not appear to be linked directly with increases in atherosclerosis and CVDs.
Our picture of the relationship between fat in the diet and cholesterol in the blood is further complicated by lipoproteins, conjugated proteins (see Section 1B.5) which transport lipids around the body.
• Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) are made from saturated fats, cholesterol and protein and bind to cell membranes before being taken into the cells. If there are high levels of some LDLs, your cell membranes become saturated and so more LDL cholesterol remains in your blood.
• High-density lipoproteins (HDLs) are made from unsaturated fats, cholesterol and protein. They carry cholesterol from body tissues to the liver to be broken down, lowering blood cholesterol levels. HDLs can even help to remove cholesterol from fatty plaques on the arteries which reduces the risk of atherosclerosis.
Scientists are now confident that the balance of these lipoproteins in your blood is a good indication of your risk of developing atherosclerosis and the associated CVDs (see fig F).

50

40

30

20


10

0
<2.5




2.5–3.0	3.1–3.6
LDL/HDL ratio




3.7–4.3	>4.3

? fig F This evidence from a well-known European study into heart disease appears to show a clear link between the LDL/HDL ratio and deaths from coronary heart disease (CHD).
Blood cholesterol and LDL/HDL levels are not simply related to diet. The way your body metabolises the fats you eat and manages the levels of cholesterol and balance of lipoproteins in your
blood are all linked to your genetic make-up. Some people can metabolise almost any amount of fat and maintain a good balance of LDLs and HDLs. Other people cannot cope so well and even small amounts of fat in the diet are reflected in raised blood cholesterol levels.











Your diet is not all about the fats you eat. Lots of studies show that eating lots of fruit and vegetables benefits your health in many ways – including reducing your risk of developing CVDs. The graph in fig A is one piece of evidence which shows how eating five or more portions of fruit or vegetables
a day can lower your risk of having a heart attack. It was based on data from a longitudinal study of more than 84 000 women and 42 000 men over eight years, looking at their fruit and vegetable intake and cardiac health.
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
<3.0	3.0–3.9 4.0–4.9 5.0–5.9 6.0–6.9	?7.0
Fruit and vegetable intake (servings per day)
? fig A This graph shows the impact of eating increasing amounts of fruit and vegetables on the risk for coronary heart disease.

ANTIOXIDANTS AND HEART HEALTH
However, as you know, it isn’t enough to show a correlation between two things. We need to show how one thing causes another and we still don’t really know how fruit and vegetables have their effect. They are very varied in their chemistry. For some time, it was thought that the antioxidants found in fruit and vegetables might be the answer. Vitamins, such as vitamin A found in carrots, vitamin C from citrus fruits and vitamin E from leafy green vegetables, almonds and sunflower oil, are antioxidants and they are found in fruits and vegetables. Several studies appeared to show that antioxidants were the answer and many people started taking antioxidant supplements to protect their hearts. However, recent studies, including some very large metadata analyses (studies where scientists have looked at the results of many different investigations), have shown that the evidence for antioxidants being good for your heart is inconclusive. There is some evidence that some antioxidants may cause harm.
VITAMIN C: A CASE STUDY
Vitamin C is important in the formation of connective tissue in the body, such as in the bones, teeth, skin and many internal body surfaces including the endothelial lining of blood vessels. A severe
lack of vitamin C in the diet causes scurvy, which can result in bleeding gums, bruising easily and painful joints. As you have seen, if the lining of an artery is damaged, atherosclerosis is more likely to develop. So, it makes sense, in theory, that if your diet is low in vitamin C, your arteries are more likely to be damaged and you are more likely to be affected by CVD.
A study published in the British Medical Journal in 1997 looked at the association between concentration of vitamin C in the blood and risk of heart attack in 1605 men from eastern Finland. The men had no sign of coronary artery disease when they were tested between 1984 and 1989. Their vitamin C levels were also tested. Between 1984 and 1992 a total 70 of the men had a heart


attack (some fatal, some not). Of the men who showed low vitamin C levels, 13.2% had heart attacks, compared with 3.8% of the men who showed no sign of vitamin C deficiency. Many people began eating lots of vitamin C rich foods, and taking vitamin C supplements, in the belief that they were reducing their risk of having heart disease.
Then, in 2016, a major metadata study was published in the International Journal of Molecular Sciences. It looked at all the evidence for the antioxidant properties of vitamin C as an explanation of the known benefits of fruit and vegetables on heart health. The conclusions were that there was no relationship between them. The study even showed that taking vitamin C supplements could damage heart health. This is a good example of where there is contradictory evidence – and where scientists must look at all of that evidence to avoid coming to the wrong conclusions.














There is much scientific evidence about the main factors that increase the risk of heart disease.
A lot of that evidence is used by governments and health organisations to produce advice on how to improve our health. Why do they do this?
PREVENTION IS BETTER THAN CURE
Cardiovascular disease has a negative effect on individuals, on families and on society. It costs a lot of money to treat people in hospital. When people are too ill to work, they are losing money for their families, and also for the companies where they work. Treating people with drugs to prevent them from needing surgery is cheaper for health service providers. It is even cheaper (and better for the individual) if we can stop ourselves needing the drugs. So, prevention is better than treatment for CVDs for many reasons (see fig A). However, persuading people to change their lifestyle habits is often difficult.
For example, there is a lot of reliable evidence to show that smoking is one of the highest risk factors for CVDs. However, if you stop smoking, your risk of developing heart disease is almost halved after just one year. Moreover, research carried out by a team led by Azra Mahmud from Trinity College Dublin and published in 2007 suggests that after 10 years, the arteries of smokers who stop smoking are the same as if they had never smoked. There is a lot of support available for people who want to stop smoking. Yet, despite all this, almost 1 billion people around the world smoke cigarettes and millions of them die each year of CVDs and cancers linked to their smoking.
Health education programmes in schools and communities can help to make sure that everyone is aware of the risks associated with different lifestyle choices. However, each individual has to make their own choices and take their own risks.
OVERWEIGHT OR UNDERFIT?
Most people are aware that obesity is linked to CVDs, and many go on slimming diets to try to lose weight. Most people also know that taking regular exercise helps protect against CVDs – but more people choose to go on a diet than choose to take regular exercise. The results of a study carried out over an average of eight years on 20 000 men aged from
30 to 83 years are given in Section 1C.4 fig B. Fitness was defined by how much oxygen they used during exercise. The results show that if you

are obese and fit you have a lower risk of dying from CVDs than someone who is not obese but unfit. Obviously, being the correct weight and fit is best of all!

? fig A Infographics like this one published in Gulf News help people understand the factors which affect their heart health.

The problem is that many people enjoy their food, and don’t take sufficient exercise. It takes a lot of effort to cut down the amount of food you eat and change to eating healthier foods including lots of fruit and vegetables.


SO WHY DON’T PEOPLE CHANGE THEIR LIFESTYLE?
Part of the problem is that people find it difficult to distinguish between perceived risk and actual risk. They can see a risk applies to an average of a group, but not to themselves as individuals. If you see people smoking, eating a high-fat, high-salt diet, never exercising and yet appearing well, the evidence of your own experience contradicts and overrides the evidence from research reported
in the media. People then underestimate the risk of CVDs associated with smoking, obesity, lack of exercise or a high-salt diet.
There are other reasons that lead to mistakes when people assess risk. Sometimes people will continue smoking because they don’t want to gain weight. Smoking speeds up the metabolism and reduces the appetite, which both help to control body mass. Here, the health risks of obesity are overestimated in comparison with those of smoking. In other words, the risks of smoking are ignored because people do not want to get fat. Also, the nicotine in tobacco smoke is addictive to many people, and this makes it very difficult to give up smoking.
When people calculate their personal risk/benefit situation, it is easy to think that the immediate benefit (pleasure in eating high-fat food, smoking, not wanting to make the effort to exercise) is more important than the apparently low risk of heart disease.














Once a patient has signs of cardiovascular disease, there are a number of different treatment options available. Changing lifestyle, such as improving diet, giving up smoking and taking more exercise can help but there are also various drugs that can be given. The drugs aim to reduce the risks associated with CVDs by helping to prevent problems developing. However, all medicines carry some risk.
CONTROLLING BLOOD PRESSURE
As you have seen, hypertension or high blood pressure is a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases.
ANTIHYPERTENSIVES
Drugs that reduce blood pressure are known as antihypertensives. Some commonly prescribed antihypertensive drugs are described below.
• Treatment often begins with diuretics, which increase the volume of urine produced. This eliminates excess fluids and salts, so that the blood volume decreases. With less blood, a smaller volume is pumped from the heart and the blood pressure falls.
• Beta blockers interfere with the normal system for controlling the heart. They block the response of the heart to hormones such as adrenaline, which normally act to speed up the heart and increase the blood pressure (you will find out more in Book 2 Topic 7). So, beta blockers make the heart rate slower and the contractions less strong, so the blood pressure is lower.
Sympathetic nerve inhibitors affect the sympathetic nerves which go from your central nervous system to all parts of your body (you will find out more in Book 2 Topic 7). Sympathetic nerves stimulate your arteries to constrict, which raises your blood pressure. The inhibitors prevent these nerves signalling to the arteries, which helps to keep the arteries dilated and your blood pressure lower.
• Angiotensin is a hormone which stimulates the constriction of your blood vessels and so causes the blood pressure to rise. ACE inhibitors block the production of angiotensin, which reduces the constriction of your blood vessels and so keeps your blood pressure lower.
The benefits of these drugs in reducing blood pressure are clear. They reduce the risk of CVDs, and also reduce the risk of damage to the kidneys and eyes from the high blood pressure.
But there are risks. The risks of these treatments are twofold.
If the treatment is not monitored carefully, your blood pressure may become too low. That can lead to falls and injuries which, particularly in elderly patients, can be serious and even life-

threatening. The second major risk is the side-effects that may result from the way your body reacts to the drugs. Each type of drug has its own possible side-effects (see fig A). For a drug to be given a licence for use, the benefits of the treatment must be judged to outweigh any side-effects.
The side-effects from commonly used antihypertensives include coughs, swelling of the ankles, impotence, tiredness and fatigue, and constipation. These are not serious compared with the health risks from high blood pressure – but to the patient they may feel very significant. High blood pressure often doesn’t make you feel ill, but the medication needed to control it can affect your quality of life.
Doctors find many patients stop taking their medication – the side- effects make them ignore the much larger but invisible risk of CVDs.

? fig A All medically licensed drugs come with instructions and information which includes possible side-effects known to be caused by the drug.


STATINS
Statins are a group of drugs that lower the level of cholesterol in your blood. They block the enzyme in the liver that is responsible for making cholesterol, and are very effective at blocking the production of LDLs. Statins also improve the balance of LDLs to HDLs and reduce inflammation in the lining of the arteries. Both functions reduce the risk of atherosclerosis developing.
Fig B shows the results from a trial using statins with a group of 6605 Asian Indians in the US. This shows the results for men and women, and other groups who are high-risk categories for cardiovascular disease. Statins reduce the incidence of serious cardiovascular disease in all categories, but they seem to have a greater effect for some groups than for others.





0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
–60

men

women

smokers

diabetes

high BP

elderly

HDL < 40

HDL > 40

? fig B These data show the benefits of statins in reducing the risk of CVDs in Asian Indians, who are a particularly high-risk group. Statins had a strong positive benefit to a range of patients.
A UK study showed that men who took a particular statin for five years had a lower risk of death or heart attack, even 10 years after they stopped taking the drug. The study involved 6595 middle-aged men. It showed that for the first five years, the overall

risk of heart attack or death from any type of heart disease was 11.8% for the men who took the statin, compared with 15.5% for men who took a placebo (an inactive substance that resembles the drug but has no action in the body). The risk was reduced the most while the men were taking the drug, but some level of protection lasted for up to 10 years afterwards.
Most people use statins with little or no ill effect. Side-effects of muscle and joint aches and nausea, constipation and diarrhoea are sometimes reported. However, there are two serious but very rare side-effects. In a tiny number of people, statins trigger a form of muscle inflammation which can be fatal. For example, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) reported 3339 cases of these muscle reactions between January 1990 and March 2002, but during this time millions of Americans took statins daily.
Statins can also cause liver problems in a small group. As an example, the risk of liver damage in people taking lovastatin is two in a million. Out of 51 741 liver transplant patients in the US between 1990 and 2002, liver failure appeared to be caused by statins in only three cases.
Another risk is more subtle: there is a risk that, if people take statins to lower their blood cholesterol, they will no longer try to eat a healthy diet, and statins give no protection against the other ill effects of a bad diet.
Plant stanols and sterols are now widely sold in spreads and yoghurts. These compounds are very similar in structure to
cholesterol. They reduce the amount of cholesterol absorbed from your gut into your blood, which can make it easier for your body to metabolise cholesterol and reduce the levels of LDLs in the blood. Products like these are sold as a food, not as a drug. While there is scientific evidence that they are effective in many people, they have not undergone the levels of testing that drugs such as statins have. Metadata analysis has shown that these products do work if they are eaten regularly in the recommended amounts (2 g



0






–4






–8






–12






–16






–20

Plant sterols (g/d)
0	0.5	1	1.5	2	2.5	3	3.5



per day of plant sterols and stanols). It has been estimated that these products can lower your risk of heart disease by about 25% if they are used correctly (see fig C).

? fig C Scientific evidence from a number of studies shows that plant
sterols can reduce harmful LDL cholesterol levels in the blood if used correctly.




ANTICOAGULANTS AND PLATELET INHIBITORY DRUGS
Following heart surgery, or after suffering from a blood clot (thrombosis), drug treatments are used to help prevent the blood clotting too easily. Here are two examples.
Warfarin is an anticoagulant that interferes with the manufacture of prothrombin in the body. Low prothrombin levels make the blood clot less easily (see Section 1B.2). Warfarin has been used in rat poison – in high doses the blood will not clot at all and the rats bleed to death after the slightest injury. In humans, the dose is carefully monitored to make sure that the clotting of the blood is reduced but not prevented completely.
Platelet inhibitory drugs make the platelets less sticky, and so reduce the clotting ability of the blood. The cheapest and most common of these is aspirin (fig D) but clopidogrel is also commonly used.


? fig D Aspirin is a relatively cheap drug. It has been used traditionally as a painkiller. It is also a very effective way of preventing many cardiovascular problems.
The risks of taking aspirin are well known – it irritates the stomach lining and causes bleeding in the stomach which can become serious. A combination of aspirin and clopidogrel can reduce the risk of developing a range of cardiovascular diseases by 20–25% in some low-risk patients. However, based on data from several studies it appears that, for some patients, the risk of side-effects is much higher when the two drugs are combined. For example, for every 1000 patients at high risk of CVDs treated for 28 months, five cardiovascular events would be avoided –
but three major stomach bleeds would be caused. In lower-risk patients, 23 cardiovascular events would be avoided while 10 major bleeds would be caused.

It is difficult to achieve the correct balance between preventing the blood from clotting too easily while allowing it to clot when necessary. For example, when people are treated with anticoagulant drugs such as warfarin, they must be monitored very carefully to make sure that they do not bleed internally,
particularly in the brain. The decision whether to give warfarin will depend on many factors, including the patient’s age and condition as well as other medication they may be taking.











HEART FAILURE IN THE MIDDLE EAST


CRITICAL THINKING, PROBLEM SOLVING, ANALYSIS, DECISION MAKING, CREATIVITY, INNOVATION, PERSONAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, CONTINUOUS LEARNING, INTELLECTUAL
INTEREST AND CURIOSITY, COMMUNICATION, EMPATHY/PERSPECTIVE TAKING

One in four adults in Saudi Arabia are expected to suffer a heart attack within the next 10 years. In the Middle East, the average age for onset of heart failure is 10 years lower than in Western Countries. Heart disease is a multifactorial disease – many factors contribute to the risks of developing heart disease. However, the final failure of the heart can often be attributed to one contributing factor. While 70% of heart failure in the West can be attributed to coronary artery disease, this is not the case in the Middle East.

ABSTRACT


The clinical syndrome of heart failure is the final pathway for
a myriad of diseases that affect the heart, and is a leading and growing cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Evidence- based guidelines have provided clinicians with valuable data
for better applying diagnostic and therapeutic tools, particularly the overwhelming new imaging technology and other, often expensive, therapies and devices, in heart failure patients. In the Middle East, progress has recently been made with the
development of regional and multi-centre registries to evaluate the quality of care for patients with heart failure. A new heart function clinic recently began operation and has clearly resulted in a reduced readmission rate for heart failure patients. Many Middle Eastern countries have observed increases in the prevalence of
the risk factors for the development of heart failure, including diabetes mellitus, obesity, and hypertension, with heart failure in the Middle Eastern population developing earlier than it is in their Western counterparts by at least 10 years. The earlier onset of disease is the result of the earlier onset of coronary artery disease, highlighting the need for Middle Eastern countries to establish prevention programs across all age groups. The health systems across the Middle East need to be modified in order to provide improved evidence-based medical care. Existing registries also need to be expanded to include long-term survey data, and additional funding for heart failure research is warranted.

References
Hazebroek M., Dennert R., Heymans S. Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy: possible triggers and treatment strategies. Neth Heart J 2012 Aug; 20(7–8)332–335
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3402574/
Arjen Radder. MENA has a heart disease problem. The solution is both basic and high-tech. World Economic Forum May 2017 https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/05/cardiovascular-disease- is-threatening-the-middle-easts-health-connected-technology-is- the-answer/
Hala Khalef. Heart disease causes 45% of early deaths in Middle East. The National 2010 January https://www.thenational.ae/uae/heart-disease-causes-45-of-early- deaths-in-middle-east-1.499807
Why the number of heart attack cases are growing. The Kahjeel Times 2015 October
https://www.khaleejtimes.com/nation/uae-health/why-the- number-of-heart-attack-cases-are-growing
In Middle East and North Africa, health challenges are becoming similar to those in western countries. The World Bank 2013 September
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2013/09/04/ middle-east-north-Africa-health-challenges-similar-western- countries

From: Mostafa Q Al-Shamiri. Heart failure in the Middle East. Current Cardiology Reviews 2013 May; 9(2):174–178 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3682400/#R10


SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
1 (a) Who do you think the intended audience is?
(b) What is the intended message the author is trying to give?
(c) There are a number of terms used in the article. Select three unfamiliar terms from the article and research their meaning. Suggest why those terms have been used.
(d) An abstract is meant to indicate to the reader what is contained in the rest of the document. From the abstract, a researcher might decide whether or not to read the rest of the article. What sort of information would you expect to find in the rest of this article?

ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION




BIOLOGY IN DETAIL
Now you are going to think about the science in the article. You will be surprised how much you know already, but if you choose to do so, you can return to these questions later in your course.
2 (a) What are the main contributing factors to development of heart failure mentioned by the author?
(b) Name two more contributing factors.
3 Changes in lifestyle and diet have been blamed for huge increases in the risk factors. For example, diabetes has increased by 87% between 1990 and 2010.
(a) What lifestyle changes are likely to cause such an increase in diabetes?
(b) What changes in diet may contribute to such an increase in diabetes?
4 The author is writing about epidemiology. That is the branch of medicine which deals with the incidence, distribution and possible control of diseases and other factors relating to health. How does understanding the incidence of heart failure and the factors that contribute to it help the medical profession to combat heart failure?
5 Common causes of heart failure are ischaemic heart disease, uncontrolled hypertension and valvular disease. However, in up to 50% of the cases its exact cause remains unknown; this condition is called idiopathic cardiomyopathy. The table shows the results of an epidemiological study.

CAUSE OF HEART FAILURE% OF CASES IN EACH COUNTRYOMANEGYPTSAUDI ARABIAYEMENischaemic heart disease52665252valvular disease8.522.510.57hypertension2525idiopathic cardiomyopathy8.311(a) Which cause of heart failure should be the focus of most research?
(b) Suggest why the exact cause of heart failure may be unknown in up to 50% of cases.

REASONING


	











1 (a) What is an atheroma?
A a hardened part of the artery wall
B a swelling in the artery wall
C a fatty deposit in the artery wall
D a narrowing of the artery wall	[1]
(b) Justify the use of the term multifactorial when used to describe atherosclerosis.	[2]
(c) (i)	Which of the following is not a risk factor for atherosclerosis?
A obesity
B high-salt diet
C high-fibre diet
D lack of exercise	[1]
(ii) One weight loss plan suggests eating a diet with no carbohydrate but allows eating as much protein and fat as you like. Discuss the merits of such a diet.	[6]
(Total for Question 1 = 10 marks)
2 There are many factors that increase the risk of developing atherosclerosis.
(a) Discuss whether correlation means cause.	[4]
(b) Many studies have been conducted to investigate the causes of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. State three factors in the design of a study which make the findings more valid.	[3]
(c) The photograph below shows a small artery with a large
(b) 
The illustration below shows the coronary arteries in the heart with the position of three possible blockages labelled A, B and C.











C

B


A





Explain why a blockage at C would have far greater consequences than a blockage at either A or B.	[3]
(c) The bar charts below show the proportion of people with coronary artery disease based on a Jordanian study in 2017.

plaque or atheroma. If the internal diameter of the artery is	10
1 mm, determine the area blocked by the plaque.	[2]
8
6
4
2
0

Smoking 2


Male Female

<45	45–54	55–64	651



10
8
6
4
(Total for Question 2 = 9 marks)	2
3 (a) What is the role of the coronary arteries?	0
A to deliver oxygenated blood to the atria

Age (years)
Smoking 1









<45	45–54	55–64	651




Male Female

B to deliver oxygenated blood to the ventricle walls
C to carry deoxygenated blood into the atria
D to carry oxygen and nutrients to the rest of the body [1]

Age (years)
(i) Describe the effect that smoking has on the risk of developing coronary artery disease in men of
different ages.	[4]





(ii) Suggest why there is no data for women in the 55–64 age bracket.	[1]
(iii) What does the lack of data for women in the 55–64 age bracket suggest about the study? That it is:
A not valid
B not reliable
C not precise
D not repeatable.	[1]
(iv) Assuming that smoking affects women to the same extent as men, what proportion of women would you expect to have CAD in the 55–64 age bracket
of smokers?	[3]
(Total for Question 3 = 13 marks)
4 (a) Describe the main stages in the formation of an
atheroma.	[3]
(b) Explain how atherosclerosis can lead to a heart attack.	[3]
(c) The average age for a first heart attack in the UAE is 20 years younger than the global average. A recent survey of 850 heart attack patients in the UAE gave the following results.

Risk factorDiabetesHigh blood pressureHigh blood cholesterolNumber of patients with risk factor380212% of patients with risk factor3844.7Calculate the number of patients in the survey who had diabetes.	[2]
Calculate the % of heart attack patients in the survey who had high blood cholesterol.	[2]
(d) State two other risk factors that increase the chance of a heart attack.	[2]
(Total for Question 4 = 12 marks)
5 (a) Explain why perceived risk is often not the same as
actual risk.	[2]
(b) One risk factor for cardiovascular disease is obesity. The table below shows the BMI scale.

BMICategory18.5–24.9normal25–29.9overweight30–34.9obese35–39.9dangerously obese(i) What is the BMI for a man who is 1.8 metres tall and weighs 115 kg?
A 0.03
B 30.6
C 35.5
D 63.9	[1]
(ii) 
Suggest three changes in lifestyle that a health professional might advise for this man.	[3]
(iii) Name another quick and easy measure that people could use to indicate if they are obese.	[1]
(c) Despite increasing evidence of the risks caused by obesity, approximately one-third of the population in the Middle East are obese. Discuss why so many people are obese. [3]
(Total for Question 5 = 10 marks)
6 A person at risk of cardiovascular disease may be given medication to reduce their risk.
(a) How might anticoagulants or platelet inhibitors reduce the risk of a heart attack or stroke?	[2]
(b) Factors such as high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes are a direct result of obesity. Evaluate the use of medication such as antihypertensives and statins to treat people who are at risk of cardiovascular disease.	[4]
(c) The graph below shows the relative risk of coronary heart disease plotted against the number of servings of fruit and vegetables eaten per day.
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
<3.0	3.0–3.9 4.0–4.9 5.0–5.9 6.0–6.9	?7.0
Fruit and vegetable intake (servings/per day)
(i) People are advised to eat at least five servings of fruit and vegetables per day. Justify this advice using the information in the graph.	[3]
(ii) Suggest what evidence there is in the graph to modify the advice.	[2]
(Total for Question 6 = 11 marks)











In order to be able to develop your skills, knowledge and understanding in Biology, you will need to have developed your mathematical skills in a number of key areas. 10% of the marks in your exams will be for level 2 or higher maths. This is maths where you will need to make some kind of decision such as what equation to use or select what data to use from a graph or some other source. The maths will be tested in a biological context. Marks will be awarded for the correct answer, but you may also gain marks
for showing your working – so always remember to set out your maths calculations clearly. This section gives more explanation and examples of some key mathematical concepts you need to understand. Further examples relevant to your International AS/A level Biology studies are given throughout the book.
ARITHMETIC AND NUMERICAL COMPUTATION
USING STANDARD FORM
Dealing with very large or small numbers can be difficult. To make them easier to handle, you can write them in the format a × 10b. This is called standard form.
To change a number from decimal form to standard form:
• Count the number of positions you need to move the decimal
point by until it is directly to the right of the first number which
is not zero.
• This number is the index number that tells you how many
multiples of 10 you need. If the original number was a decimal,
your index number must be negative.
Here are some examples:
USING RATIOS, FRACTIONS AND PERCENTAGES
Ratios, fractions and percentages help you to express one quantity in relation to another with precision. Ratios compare like quantities using the same units. Fractions and percentages are important mathematical tools for calculating proportions.
RATIOS
A ratio is used to compare quantities. You can simplify ratios by dividing each side by a common factor. For example 12 : 4 can be simplified to 3 : 1 by dividing each side by 4.



FRACTIONS
When using fractions, make sure you know the key strategies for the four operators.
Remember:
• the denominator is the number under the line in a fraction
• the numerator is the number over the line in a fraction
• the operator is what the fraction is doing (adding, subtracting, multiplying or dividing).
To add or subtract fractions, find the lowest common multiple (LCM) and then use the golden rule of fractions. The golden rule states that a fraction remains unchanged if the numerator and denominator are multiplied or divided by the same number.
To multiply fractions together, simply multiply the numerators together and multiply the denominators together.
To divide fractions, simply invert or flip the second fraction and multiply.



PERCENTAGES
When using percentages, it is useful to recall the different types of percentage questions.
To increase a value by a given percentage, use a percentage multiplier.

symbolise important variables such as the blood sugar level of a diabetic or the irregular heartbeat of a patient.
The key rule to remember when using equations is that any operation that you apply to one side of the equation must also be applied to the other side.











To decrease a value by a given percentage, you need to focus on the part that is left over after the decrease.

CHANGING THE SUBJECT OF AN EQUATION
It can be helpful to rearrange an equation to express or isolate the variable you are interested in. Always remember that any operation that you apply to one side of the equation must also be applied to the other side.




To calculate a percentage increase, use the following equation:
Percentage change = difference between values × 100
original value
To calculate percentage decrease, use the same equation but remember that your answer should be negative. Also remember that a percentage increase or decrease requires two steps: calculate the change, then calculate the percentage.















ALGEBRA
USING ALGEBRAIC EQUATIONS
Using algebraic equations is a very important skill for finding the value of an unknown quantity. In the real world, letters are used to




HANDLING DATA
USING SIGNIFICANT FIGURES
Often when you do a calculation, your answer will have many more figures than you need. Using an appropriate number of significant figures will help you to interpret results in a meaningful way.
Remember the ‘rules’ for significant figures:
• the first significant figure is the first figure which is not zero
• digits 1–9 are always significant
• zeros which come after the first significant figure are significant unless the number has already been rounded.
Here are some examples.
UNDERSTANDING THE TERMS MEAN, MEDIAN AND MODE
There are three different measures of average that you should know how to calculate.

• The mean is calculated by adding up all of the values in the data set and dividing them by the
number of values. It is sometimes called the arithmetical average. The mean takes into account
each number of the data set equally and can be used for further statistical analysis such as calculating a standard deviation. However, a disadvantage of the mean is that it may be affected by extreme values.
• The median is the middle value when the values are arranged in order. The median of a data set is
found by putting the values in order from lowest to highest and then finding the middle value. If there
is an even number of values, the median is found by calculating the mean of the two middle values.
• The mode is the value that occurs most often. The mode of a data set is found by identifying the
most frequent value. It may not be possible to calculate the mode if there are two or more values
with the same highest frequency.


















CALCULATING THE MEAN FROM FREQUENCY DATA
The mean can be calculated from frequency data by finding the sum of the individual values multiplied by their respective frequencies and then dividing by the total frequency.




UNITS OF ALCOHOL CONSUMED IN A WEEKNUMBER OF PATIENTS0427412698151023


6 Find the square root of your answer. This is the standard deviation.
WORKED EXAMPLE
A pupil investigates the effect that two newly developed fertilisers (A and B) have on the growth of potato crops. Fourteen 10 m2 areas of a field were sectioned off and treated with either fertiliser A or B. The table below shows the yields of potatoes from the test areas following harvest.
(a) Calculate the mean and standard deviation for the test plot yields for fertilisers A and B.
(b) Interpret the results of your answers to (a).




UNDERSTANDING MEASURES OF DISPERSION INCLUDING STANDARD DEVIATION AND RANGE
Two different sets of data may have similar averages but statisticians are interested in looking deeper into the data for meaningful differences in dispersion. For example, if one data set refers to patients who are given a new cancer drug and a second data set refers to patients who are given a placebo drug, it is very important to look for key differences in the dispersion of data, such as standard deviation and range, and not just at measures of average.
RANGE
The range of a set of data is the difference between the highest and lowest values in the set. To find the range, subtract the smallest value in the set from the largest value in the set.
STANDARD DEVIATION
Standard deviation is a measure of the dispersion or ‘spread’ of data around the mean.
• A low standard deviation indicates that the data have a narrow
range and the points are closely grouped to the mean. This
could indicate greater reliability.
• A high standard deviation indicates that the data points have
a larger range and are less well grouped. This might indicate
lower reliability.
To calculate the standard deviation, use the formula:
s = ?S(x – x¯)2
where s = standard deviation, x is an individual value, ¯x = the mean value, n = the number of values.
TECHNIQUE
1 Calculate the mean of the data set by finding the sum of the values and then dividing by the number of values. This is ¯x.
2 For each data value, calculate the difference between the data value and the mean. Record these figures in a table.
3 Find the square of each of these differences. Record these figures in a new column in your table.
4 Find the sum of these squares. This is S(x – ¯x)2.
5 Divide this figure by the number of items in the data set.
S(x – ¯x)2




(a) To calculate the mean yield for A:
25 + 27 + 34 + 18 + 21 + 26 + 28 = 179
179/7 = 25.6 kg to 1 d.p.
To calculate the standard deviation for A:
(25 – 25.6)2 = 0.36	(27 – 25.6)2 = 1.96
(34 – 25.6)2 = 70.56	(18 – 25.6)2 = 57.76
(21 – 25.6)2 = 21.16	(26 – 25.6)2 = 0.16
(28 – 25.6)2 = 5.76
Sum of squares = 157.72

Divide by the number of plots:
157.72/7 = 22.5314
Now calculate the square root of this value:
?22.5314 = 4.8 to 1 d.p.
To calculate the mean yield for B:
17 + 35 + 42 + 19 + 35 + 22 + 44 = 214
214/7= 30.6 kg to 1 d.p.
To calculate the standard deviation for B:
(17 – 30.6)2 = 184.96	(35 – 30.6)2 = 19.36
(42 – 30.6)2 = 129.96	(19 – 30.6)2 =134.56
(35 – 30.6)2 = 19.36	(22 – 30.6)2 = 73.96
(44 – 30.6)2 = 179.56
Sum of squares = 741.72
?741.72/7 = 10.3 kg to 1 d.p.
(b) Fertiliser B produces a greater yield of potato crop (19% increase from fertiliser A), however the variation in crop yield (as shown by the standard deviation) of plots treated with fertiliser B is much greater and so fertiliser A produces a more consistent crop yield.

This is	n


UNDERSTANDING SIMPLE PROBABILITY
The term probability is used to talk about the likelihood of an event happening on a scale of 0 to 1. A probability of 0 means that it is impossible that an event will occur. A probability of 1 means that it is certain that an event will occur. You should be comfortable interpreting probabilities in a scientific context, such as the probability of developing a disease or inheriting a specific gene.
INTERPRETING A SCATTERGRAM
A scattergram is a useful way of representing the relationship between two variables. To draw a scattergram, first choose appropriate scales and label both axes. Then, use a pencil to draw a small point (a cross or sharp dot) for each pair of variables.
A scattergram can be used to interpret whether there is correlation between two variables. We say that there is correlation between two variables if when one variable changes, there is also a change in the other variable.
• If the points are distributed tightly around a line, the variables are strongly correlated.
• If the points are loosely distributed around a line, the variables are weakly correlated.
• If there is no pattern in the distribution of points, there is no correlation.
Correlation can be positive (as one variable increases, the other also increases) or negative (as one
variable increases, the other decreases).
A scattergram may include one or more points that lie outside of the main spread of values. Such a point is called an outlier or anomaly and it can be ignored.
To draw a line of best fit, use a ruler to draw a straight line that passes as close as possible to all of the points. You can use a line of best fit to make estimations. This is called interpolation. The more closely correlated the variables, the more accurate your estimate is likely to be.



CONSTRUCTING HISTOGRAMS
Constructing frequency tables and histograms is often the first step to looking carefully at a set of raw continuous data and helps us to begin to look for patterns and behaviours in a data set. Histograms are very similar to bar charts but there are two differences.
• In a bar chart, each column represents a discrete category. The columns are of equal widths and
always separated.
• In a histogram, the columns represent continuous data. The width of the columns is usually the
same for each category. However, for more advanced work the widths may vary. The columns are
always adjacent.
TECHNIQUE
1 Find the range of your values.
2 Choose the categories that you will use. Make sure that they are continuous (i.e. there are no gaps and there is no overlap between categories).
3 Create a frequency table.
4 Plot your data, ensuring that frequency is represented on the y-axis and that the categories are represented on the x-axis.



be represented by the equation y = mx + c where the gradient of the line is m and the value at which the line crosses the y-axis is
c. An example of a linear relationship is the relationship between degrees Celsius and degrees Fahrenheit, which can be represented by the equation F = _9 C + 32 where C is temperature in degrees
Celsius and F is temperature in degrees Fahrenheit.
Conversion of
Celsius temperatures to Fahrenheit


120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0











10	20	30
Celsius temperature











40



104°F)











PRINCIPLES OF SAMPLING
When a scientist studies a population, it is not possible to study each organism in detail. Scientists therefore use sampling to estimate characteristics of the whole population by looking at a subset of individuals in the population. It is important that the sample chosen is representative of the habitat.
Once a suitable sample has been selected, it can be analysed.
A measure of biodiversity that takes into account both the species richness and the species abundance of an area can be calculated using the following formula.
D = N(N ? 1)
?n(n ? 1)
where n is the number of individuals of a particular species (or the percentage cover for plants), and N is the total number of all individuals of all species (or the total percentage cover for plants).
GRAPHS
UNDERSTAND THAT y = mx + c REPRESENTS A LINEAR RELATIONSHIP
Two variables are in a linear relationship if they increase at a constant rate in relation to one another. If you plotted a graph with one variable on the x-axis and the other variable on the
y-axis, you would get a straight line. Any linear relationship can

CALCULATE A RATE OF CHANGE FROM A GRAPH SHOWING A LINEAR RELATIONSHIP
The rate of change from a graph showing a linear relationship is the gradient, or steepness, of the line. It is a measure of the rate of change of one variable (represented on the x-axis) in relation to the other variable (represented on the y-axis).
TECHNIQUE
1 Draw a right-angled triangle anywhere on the line.
2 Use the following equation to calculate the rate of change: difference on y-axis


gradient = difference on x-axis
3 State the unit for your answer.
DRAW AND USE THE SLOPE OF A TANGENT TO A CURVE AS A MEASURE OF A RATE OF CHANGE
A tangent is a straight line that just touches the curve at one point. The gradient of a curve at a given point is equal to the gradient of the tangent to the curve at that point.
TECHNIQUE
1 Use a ruler to draw a tangent to the curve.
2 Calculate the gradient of the tangent using the technique given for a linear relationship. This is equal to the gradient of the curve at the point of the tangent.
3 State the unit for your answer.
APPLYING YOUR SKILLS
You will often find that you need to use more than one maths technique to answer a question. In this section, we will look at two example questions and consider which maths skills are required and how to apply them.


WORKED EXAMPLE
Hydrogen peroxide is a toxic by-product of metabolism and is made in all living cells. Cells make the enzyme catalase in order to convert the toxin into water and oxygen. In order to study the effect of temperature on catalase activity, an experiment was set up using the equipment shown in the figure below. The volume of oxygen released in 30 seconds was measured at various temperatures using the gas syringe. The results of the experiment are shown in the graph below.




gas syringe


conical flask reaction mixture
(catalase + hydrogen peroxide)
Experimental result
80
60
40
20
0
10	20	30	40	50	60
Temperature/°C
(a) Calculate the percentage increase in volume of oxygen produced in 30 seconds at 40 °C compared to that produced
at 10 °C.	(3 marks)
(b) Calculate the rate of gas production at 20, 40 and 50 °C and interpret the results.	(5 marks)
(c) A further experiment is carried out where the volume of oxygen is recorded over the entire time of the reaction at 10 °C and
40 °C. The results are shown below:

TOTAL VOLUME OF OXYGEN RELEASED/cm3TEMPERATURE
/ °C0 s10 s20 s30 s40 s50 s60 s70 s80 s90 s10025916222833353540071527333535353535Display both sets of results on a graph with an appropriate scale.
(4 marks)



WORKED EXAMPLE
A photomicrograph of a T helper cell was taken using an electron microscope set at a magnification of
×50 000. In the image, several organelles were clearly identified and measured.
(a) Calculate the actual object length of each organelle.	(4 marks)

ORGANELLEIMAGE LENGTH/mmOBJECT LENGTH/?mnucleus240endoplasmic reticulum360lysosome10mitochondrion120(b) A lysosome is a spherical organelle. Calculate the surface area and volume of a lysosome.	(3 marks)
(c) Calculate the surface area to volume ratio of a lysosome.	(2 marks)


(a) The question tells us that the magnification is ×50 000. We know that image size = actual size × magnification
To make it easier to use, we can rearrange this equation as actual size =
Actual length of nucleus =  240  = 0.0048 mm
50 000
Actual length of ER =  360  = 0.0072 mm
50 000
Actual length of lysosome =   10   = 0.0002 mm
50 000
Actual length of mitochondrion =  120  = 0.0024 mm
50 000



 image size magnification

Before we can put these figures in the table, we need to convert to ?m. 1 mm = 1000 ?m so we need to multiply each figure by 1000.




(1 mark each)
(b) Recall the following formulae, where r is radius: Surface area of sphere = 4? r 2
Volume of sphere = 4? r 3
From (a) you know that the diameter of the lysosome is 0.2 ?m. This means that the radius must be
0.1 ?m.	(1 mark)
Surface area of lysosome = 4?(0.1)2 = 4? × 0.01 = 0.1257 ?m2 to 4 d.p.	(1 mark)
Volume of lysosome = 4 ?(0.1)3 = 4? × 0.001 = 0.0042 ?m3 to 4 d.p.	(1 mark)
3	3
(c) It is simplest and most accurate to use the exact expressions from (b) involving ?, rather than the final answers which have been rounded.
Surface area to volume ratio = 4? × 0.01 : 4? × 0.001
We can simplify by multiplying each side by 1000 and dividing each side by ?:

Surface area to volume ratio = 40 : 4
Now we can divide each side by 4 and multiply by 3 to get:

(1 mark)

Surface area to volume ratio = 120 : 4 = 30 : 1	(1 mark)




IAS AND IAL OVERVIEW
The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary (IAS) in Biology and the Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level (IAL) in Biology are modular qualifications. The IAS can be claimed on completion of the International Advanced Subsidiary (IAS) units. The International Advanced Level can be claimed on completion of all the units (IAS and IA2 units).
• International AS students will sit three exam papers. The IAS qualification can either be standalone or contribute 50% of the marks for the International Advanced Level.
• International A level students will sit six exam papers, the three IAS papers and three IAL papers. The tables below give details of the exam papers for each qualification.

IAS PapersPaper 1: Unit 1
Molecules, Diet, Transport and HealthPaper 2: Unit 2
Cells, Development, Biodiversity and Conservation*Paper 3: Unit 3
Practical Skills in Biology 1Topics coveredTopics 1–2Topics 3–4Topics 1–4% of the IAS level qualification40%40%20%% of the IA level qualification20%20%10%Length of exam1 hour 30 minutes1 hour 30 minutes1 hour 20 minutesMarks available80 marks80 marks50 marksQuestion typesmultiple choice short open open response calculation
extended writingmultiple choice short open open response calculation
extended writingshort open open response calculationMathematicsA minimum of 10% of the marks across all three both papers will be awarded for mathematics at Level 2 or above* This paper will contain some synoptic questions which require knowledge and understanding from Unit 1.

IAL PapersPaper 1: Unit 4
Energy, the Environment, Microbiology and Immunity**Paper 2: Unit 5
Respiration, the Internal Environment†Paper 3: Unit 6
Co-ordination and Gene TechnologyTopics coveredTopics 5–6Topics 7–8Topics 5–8% of the IAL qualification20%20%10%Length of exam1 hour 45 minutes1 hour 45 minutes1 hour 20 minutesMarks available90 marks90 marks50 marksQuestion typesmultiple choice short open open response calculation
extended writingmultiple choice short open open response calculation
extended writingdrawing short open
open response calculationMathematicsA minimum of 10% of the marks across all three papers will be awarded for mathematics at Level 2 or above** This paper will contain some synoptic questions which require knowledge and understanding from Units 1 and 2.
† This paper will contain some synoptic questions which require knowledge and understanding from Units 1, 2 and 4.





EXAM STRATEGY
ARRIVE EQUIPPED
Make sure you have all of the correct equipment needed for your exam. As a minimum you should take:
• pen (a black ballpoint pen is best)
• pencil (HB)
• ruler (ideally 30 cm)
• rubber (make sure it’s clean and doesn’t smudge the pencil marks or rip the paper)
• calculator (scientific).
ENSURE YOUR ANSWERS CAN BE READ
Your handwriting does not have to be perfect but the examiner must be able to read it! When you’re in a hurry it’s easy to write key words that are difficult to decipher.
PLAN YOUR TIME
Note how many marks are available on the paper and how many minutes you have to complete it. This will give you an idea of how long to spend on each question. Be sure to leave some time at the end of the exam for checking answers. A rough guide of a minute a mark is a good start, but short answers and multiple choice questions may be quicker.
Longer answers might require more time.
UNDERSTAND THE QUESTION
Always read the question carefully and spend a few moments working out what you are being asked to do. The command word used will give you an indication of what is required in your answer. It can be useful to highlight key words in the question.
Be scientific and accurate, even when writing longer answers. Use the technical terms you’ve been taught.
Always show your working for any calculations. Marks may be available for individual steps, not just for the final answer. Also, even if you make a calculation error, you may be awarded marks for applying the correct technique.

PLAN YOUR ANSWER
In questions marked with an *, marks will be awarded for your ability to structure your answer logically showing how the points that you make are related or follow on from each other where appropriate. Read the question fully and carefully (at least twice!) before beginning your answer.
MAKE THE MOST OF GRAPHS AND DIAGRAMS
Diagrams and sketch graphs can earn marks – often more easily and quickly than written explanations – but they will only earn marks if they are carefully drawn.
• If you are asked to read a graph, pay attention to the labels and numbers on the x- and y-axes. Remember that each axis is a number line.
• If asked to draw or sketch a graph, always ensure you use a sensible scale and label both axes with quantities
and units. If plotting a graph, use a pencil and draw small crosses or dots for the points.
• Diagrams must always be neat, clear and fully labelled.
CHECK YOUR ANSWERS
For open-response and extended writing questions, check the number of marks that are available. If three marks are available, have you made three distinct points?
For calculations, read through each stage of your working. Substituting your final answer into the original question can be a simple way of checking that the final answer is correct. Another simple strategy is to consider whether the answer seems sensible. Pay particular attention to using the correct units.










QUESTION TYPE: MULTIPLE CHOICE
The genetic pedigree diagram below shows the inheritance of Tay–Sachs disease in one family.

 Unaffected female
 Unaffected male Female with
Tay-Sachs disease
Male with



You are allowed to write on the exam paper, and it will help to do so. Start by writing the genotypes of the females with Tay–Sachs disease because they must be homozygous recessive. This means that their mums must have one recessive allele. Now put just one dominant allele on those females who are unaffected. Which female has only one allele? Make sure you do not confuse the two names which are similar (Jane and Jen)!

Dan

Max

Lilly

Tay-Sachs disease

Put a cross (  ) in the box that correctly completes the statement.
The female whose genotype cannot be identified from the diagram is…
A Jane	u
B Jen	u
C Lilly	u
D Sara	u
Question analysis
• Multiple choice questions look easy until you try to answer them. Very often they require some working out and thinking.
• In multiple choice questions you are given the correct answer along with three incorrect answers (called distractors). You need to select the correct answer and put a cross in the box of the letter next to it.
• If you change your mind, put a line through the box () and then mark your new answer with a cross (	).
Average student answer B Jen

COMMENTARY
This is an incorrect answer because:
• The student did not do the necessary working to find the correct answer. For a question like this, you should write the genotype of each person on the diagram.
QUESTION TYPE: SHORT OPEN
Cystic fibrosis and albinism are examples of recessive genetic disorders. Tay-Sachs disease is another example of a recessive genetic disorder.
Explain the meaning of the term recessive genetic disorder. (2)
















Jen cannot be the right answer since we know that she is unaffected (and therefore must have one dominant allele). She has given birth to Jane who has Tay–Sachs, and therefore Jen (the mother) must have a recessive allele as well. We know Jane must have two recessive alleles since she has Tay–Sachs disease. Sara is unaffected but has given birth to Dan who has Tay–Sachs disease, and therefore she, Sara, must be the same genotype as her mum Jen.
All this just leaves Lilly: We know she is unaffected, so must have at least one dominant ‘normal’ allele. However we have no idea whether she is homozygous or heterozygous. Thus Lilly is the correct answer.

If you have any time left at the end of the paper go back and check your answer to each part of a multiple choice question so that a slip like this does not cost you a mark.


The command word in this question is explain. This indicates that you will need to use ‘therefore’, ‘so’ or ‘because’ in your answer. Answer the question bit by bit: explain what makes an allele recessive, and then use a ‘therefore’ to explain how someone might suffer from this disorder.



Question analysis
• Generally one piece of information is required for each mark given in the question. There are two marks available for this question so make sure you make two distinct points.
• Clarity and brevity are the keys to success on short open questions. For one mark, it is not always necessary to write complete sentences.
Average student answer

The only way you are able to get the disease is if both your parents had the disease or both your parents are carriers. You have to be homozygous, two alleles the same.
The recessive allele codes for the disease.

Misreading the question can lose you marks, as can answering in insufficient detail. One recessive allele does not code for the disease, but simply codes for a faulty protein.










QUESTION TYPE: OPEN RESPONSE
Molecules are transported across the cell membrane in a number of different ways.
Describe the structure of a cell membrane.
Question analysis
• With any question worth three or more marks, think about your answer and the points that you need to make before you write anything down. Keep your answer concise, and the information you write relevant to the question. You will not gain marks for writing down biology that is not relevant to the question (even if correct) but it will cost you time.
Average student answer
A cell membrane is made up of a phospholipid bilayer.

Within this bilayer there are some proteins that span the membrane and others that are free to move within the membrane. Other features of the membrane include cholesterol, which sits within the bilayer, glycoproteins and glycolipids which are on the outer layers of the membrane and attached to either a protein or a lipid.

At this level, your answers need technical terms and clarity in expression otherwise you will find yourself losing marks.



QUESTION TYPE: EXTENDED WRITING
An investigation was carried out to study the effect of caffeine on the heart rate of a chicken embryo. The heart from a chicken embryo was removed and placed in a glucose solution.
The heart rate was determined and recorded as a base heart rate. The experiment was repeated using glucose solutions containing five different concentrations of caffeine. The heart rate was
determined and recorded as a percentage of the base heart rate for each solution.
Describe how this investigation could be carried out using Daphnia instead of chicken embryos.	(4)
Question analysis
• There will be questions in your exams which assess your understanding of practical skills and draw on your experience of the core practicals. For these questions, think about:
? how apparatus is set up
? the method of how the apparatus is to be used
? how readings are to be taken
? how to make the readings reliable
? how to control any variables.
• It helps with extended writing questions to think about the number of marks available
and how they might be distributed. For example, if the question asked you to give the arguments for and against a particular case, then assume that there would be equal numbers of marks available for each side of the argument and balance the viewpoints you give accordingly. However, you should also remember that marks will also be available for giving an overall conclusion so you should be careful not to omit that.
• It is vital to plan out your answer before you write it down. There is always space given on an exam paper to do this so just jot down the points that you want to make before you answer the question in the space provided. This will help to ensure that your answer is coherent and logical and that you don’t end up contradicting yourself. However, once you have written your answer go back and cross these notes out so that it is clear they do not form part of the answer.
Average student answer
By placing a Daphnia under a microscope, you will be able to determine the bpm by counting the heart beats in one

minute. This will give you a control to compare against.
Then by adding caffeine to the slide that the Daphnia is
placed on, in regular increasing concentrations of caffeine,
you should be able to calculate the heart rate of the Daphnia
at different caffeine concentrations. By comparing against
the control, this will allow you to note the differences in
heart rate in relation to the concentration of caffeine.

Notice that the question says ‘describe how this
experiment could be carried out using Daphnia’. You need to
adapt what you know already and apply it to this new
situation.



QUESTION TYPE: CALCULATION
Age and gender are two factors that may influence the development of heart disease in an individual. The grap below shows the results of a survey in America on the incidence of heart disease in adults aged 18 and older.

500

400

Key




300

200


100

0	18–44




45–64	65–74	75 and
older

Calculate the increased risk that a man who is 75 or older has of developing heart disease, compared to a man aged between 18 and 44 years old.	(2)
Question analysis
• The important thing with calculations is that you must show your working clearly and fully. The correct answer on the line will gain all the available marks. However, an incorrect answer can gain all but one of the available marks if the correct working is shown.
• Show the calculation that you are performing at each stage and not just the result. When you have finished, look at your result and see if it is sensible.
• At some point during your answer, you will need to do some kind of sum, and the skills are to decide
? which numbers you need
? which operation you need.
Average student answer
410 – 15 = 395. 395 = 26.3, so 26.3 times.
15
